











Section 1 
How we build generative AI systems and models responsibly 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HOW WE BUILD AI RESPONSIBLY AND MAKE DEPLOYMENT DECISIONS                                                                         7



EU AI Act implementation efforts  
Abiding by the laws of every jurisdiction in which we Act and details emerging from the General Purpose • Updating our contracts, including our Microsoft In the second half of 2025, we plan to enhance our operate is core to our business practice. Our customers AI (GPAI) Code of Practice. The first set of provisions Enterprise AI Services Code of Conduct,8 so that our reporting with new information detailing the content look to us to build technology that is trustworthy, that came into effect in February 2025 were the AI customers clearly understand they cannot engage in used for training GPAI models developed by Microsoft. which means keeping pace with rapidly evolving literacy requirements and the prohibited practices any prohibited practices. For example, the Microsoft regulations and technological developments and provisions that ban the use of AI for practices such as Enterprise AI Services Code of Conduct now has an This aligns with our commitment to transparency, 
communicating updates to our practices and policies social scoring and real-time biometric identification. express prohibition on the use of the services for upcoming regulatory requirements, and our support for  as we do so. Microsoft has undertaken various initiatives to social scoring. downstream responsible use of our GPAI models. promote AI literacy in accordance with the EU AI Act, empowering our employees, customers, and others to 
A prime example of this is our implementation In 2024, Microsoft joined a multistakeholder process 
responsibly leverage AI technologies. 
of the EU AI Act, a comprehensive new law that to support the development of the EU AI Act Code establishes uniform rules across all EU Member States of Practice for GPAI models. The Code of Practice for to address potential AI risks to health, safety, and 
fundamental rights. The EU intentionally phased the GPAI models is intended to include a set of guidelines Act's implementation over several years to ensure for compliance with the AI Act's GPAI model provider companies have adequate time to meet the Act's In alignment with these compliance deadlines, we obligations, which come into effect in August 2025. regulatory requirements, with initial obligations going proactively took a layered approach to prepare for Taking an early signal from the set of guidelines emerging  
into effect on February 2, 2025. compliance with the prohibited practices provisions, from the Code of Practice, we took a similar layered  
including: approach to prepare for compliance. This included:
The AI Act spreads obligations across actors in the 
AI supply chain, with different obligations applying • Conducting a thorough review of Microsoft-• Creating new model-level policy requirements to different entities, including providers, deployers, owned systems already on the market to identify to help our product teams understand the set distributors, and importers. The Act's obligations are any places where we needed to adjust our 
tied to development and deployment activities in the approach, including by updating documentation of evaluations, documentation, and disclosure European Union, so its provisions apply to companies or implementing technical mitigations. To do this, obligations they will need to complete when building that operate in non-EU countries, including the United we developed a series of questions designed models. 
States, when they place AI products on the EU market to elicit whether an AI system could implicate a 
or produce AI systems whose outputs are used in the 7 prohibited practice and dispatched this survey • Building new workflows and automation to capture 
EU.to our engineering teams via our central tooling. 
Relevant experts reviewed the responses and the information and generate the documentation 
Microsoft's early investments in building a followed up with teams directly where further clarity needed to align with model policies. For example, comprehensive and industry-leading responsible AI or additional steps were necessary. These screening we are in the process of integrating our central program positioned us well to do two things: questions remain in our central responsible AI responsible AI workflow with model training workflow tool so that teams working on new AI infrastructure to support the automatic capture of  1       Expand our already accelerated AI regulatory systems can answer them and engage the review readiness efforts into broader Microsoft, customer, workflow as needed. model training details for transparency obligations. and partner safety and security investments 
 2 Share our insights from years of developing and • Creating new restricted uses internally and Microsoft continues to engage with the central EU regulator, the AI Office, and other relevant authorities  implementing AI policies and working with AI updating our policies to ensure Microsoft does not 
regulators around the world, including the EU design or deploy AI systems for uses prohibited in EU Member States to share insights from our AI 
by the EU AI Act. We also developed specific development, governance, and compliance experience, 
Within Microsoft, cross-functional working groups as well as insights we hear from our customers. We marketing and sales guidance to ensure that our combining AI governance, engineering, legal, and general-purpose AI technologies are not marketed public policy experts worked together to identify also continue to seek clarity on open questions and  
      or sold for uses that could implicate the EU AI Act's whether and how our internal standards and practices advocate for practical outcomes that are efficient,  
      prohibited practices. should be updated to reflect the final text of the AI effective, and interoperable internationally. GOVERN: POLICIES, PEOPLE, AND PROCESSES 11
Processes 
While establishing principles and policies is a critical building block of our responsible AI program, it takes a broad, cross-company effort to bring Microsoft's governance framework to life.
At the executive level, leadership support for our responsible AI program starts with our CEO Satya Nadella and our Responsible AI Council, led by Vice 
Chair and President Brad Smith and Chief Technology 
Officer and Executive Vice President of AI, Kevin Scott. Quarterly Responsible AI Council meetings provide executive-level oversight into the company-wide progress we are making on our commitments. Our progress is also regularly reported to, and guidance is solicited from, the Microsoft Board of Directors through the Board's Environmental, Social, and Public Policy (ESPP) Committee.
Orchestrating Microsoft's responsible AI program across the company requires the muscle of a broader governance community. At Microsoft, this includes the Office of Responsible AI and a dedicated network of Responsible AI leaders and champions embedded throughout divisions across the company. The Office 
We continue to invest in growing, training, and cultivating a thriving and empowered Responsible AI community, which includes the Responsible AI Governance Community and other teams like RAI engineering, Aether,10  Microsoft Research, and the AI Red Team (AIRT) that carry out critical functions in the mapping, measurement, and management of AI risks. of Responsible AI advises teams across the company on legal and regulatory requirements and manages the Responsible AI Governance Community by defining roles and responsibilities, creating documented processes, and leading oversight processes such as the Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies program. 
Over the years, our Responsible AI Governance Community has matured, creating more specialized roles within each division at Microsoft. Since the launch of our Responsible AI Champions program in 2020, our Responsible AI Governance Community has grown to include Responsible AI Corporate Vice Presidents (CVPs),9 Division Leads, and Lead Responsible AI Champs. 
Responsible AI CVPs are accountable executives who provide oversight of their group's implementation of and adherence to responsible AI policies and serve on the Responsible AI Council. They are kept informed of progress by a Division Lead who drives operations and implementation of our processes to uphold customer trust in Microsoft's AI-powered products and services. Division Leads partner with Lead Responsible AI Champs to keep their teams informed of updates, implement procedures, and ensure adherence to our policies. 
The Responsible AI community is provided with indepth, ongoing training to equip them to implement responsible AI practices within their teams and divisions. In 2024, Responsible AI community members participated in a variety of trainings that covered responsible AI policies, procedures, and tools. Trainings included updates to responsible AI policies as we prepared to implement new regulatory requirements, new guidance and tooling to support teams in measuring and mitigating risks, and specialized topics at the intersection of AI and security. 
Throughout 2024, we continued to offer all Microsoft employees training on responsible AI and AI more broadly that catered to different technical knowledge 
                                                                                                                     levels and the contexts in which they develop or 
use AI. This included both live training and selfpaced training. At the broadest level, all Microsoft 
                                                 Engineering                                          employees were required to complete Trust Code 
(Standards of Business Conduct), our companywide ethics course, which included training on responsible AI. As of January 22, 2025, 99 percent of all employees completed this course. In addition to this training, employees also have the option to participate in hackathons and learning series focused on responsible AI. Throughout 2024, there were seven learning sessions focused on responsible AI hosted as part of the AI/ML Learning Series, which features insights from research and practice on AI. Cumulatively, these responsible AI-focused sessions had 6,798 attendees. In late 2024, a responsible AIfocused hybrid event featured 22 deep-dive sessions on insights and best practices related to responsible AI. This event had 1,020 unique attendees at the live session and the content was posted online for employees across the company to view at their own pace. 
For a more hands-on learning experience, Microsoft's annual Hackathon offers employees an opportunity to step out of their day-to-day work and team up with colleagues from across the company to build something innovative. The 2024 Hackathon had 738 hacks on AI that included a focus on responsible AI.
 99% 
of all employees completed the Trust Code (Standards of 
Business Conduct)      2024 Hackathons 
738 
hacks on AI included a focus on responsible AI GOVERN: POLICIES, PEOPLE, AND PROCESSES 13







MEASURE: ASSESSING RISKS AND MITIGATIONS 19



we were automatically embedding cryptographically sealed provenance metadata, also known as Content Credentials, onto all content generated by the DALL-E series of models in Azure OpenAI Service, Bing Image Creator, Microsoft Copilot, Microsoft Designer, and Microsoft Paint. 
Throughout 2024, our efforts to manage AIrelated risks in the 2024 elections centered around strengthening our AI safety architecture specifically for election-related risks and targeted efforts to detect and respond to reports of AI-generated deepfakes. On the safety architecture front, we focused efforts around managing two central risks: 
11 .       The creation and dissemination of deceptive images of political candidates 
22 . Efforts to mislead voters about critical election information 
To further these goals, we created specific product implementation guidance and tools to help teams across Microsoft mitigate the risk of their AI systems being used to generate deceptive images of candidates in key 2024 elections. If users sought critical election information-defined as factual aspects of political elections that could be clearly demonstrated to be true or false (e.g., where to vote, when to vote, and who was running)-Microsoft generative AI tools were instructed to provide a demonstrably reliable answer, directing users to specific authoritative sources (such as an election authority for that election); to redirect users to other tools such as Bing search that would surface authoritative sources; or to refuse to answer the question if other approaches were not feasible. If users sought to generate an image depicting a political candidate of a 2024 election by name, Microsoft generative AI image tools were instructed to refuse to generate that image.
In February 2024, we created a site for candidates and election authorities to report election-related deceptive AI content like deepfakes appearing on Microsoft consumer services.26 We continue to design and host trainings and briefings and send out preelection communications to election offices, political parties, and campaigns globally to enable their use of the site. Beyond responding to reported events, we solicited the support of the Microsoft Threat Analysis Center (MTAC) whose mission is to detect, assess, and disrupt foreign cyber-enabled influence threats to Microsoft, its customers, and democracies worldwide. MTAC also partnered with the AI for Good team to develop technical capabilities to better detect deepfakes. In 2024, MTAC publicly published eight reports focused on nation-state actors and election interference.27 The intelligence gathered by MTAC helped provide a broader view of the adversary threat landscape and enabled us to proactively combat deceptive AI-generated content. 
While the 2024 elections are behind us, the threat that deceptive AI content could pose to elections around the world is far from over. At Microsoft, we recognize that we need to take a whole-of-society approach to address the risk of bad actors using AI and deepfakes to deceive the public. This is why we invest in open standards like C2PA and share the insights we gather through MTAC openly. It's why we also launched a fund with OpenAI to increase AI education among voters and vulnerable communities.28 Microsoft will continue to develop our technology and policies, as well as work with other stakeholders globally, to ensure that we uphold the foundational principle of free expression for citizens in the United States and around the world. 
Microsoft's approach to AI incident detection and response 
The incident detection and response work that happens after the release of an AI product deserves just as much attention and planning as the work that happens leading up to the release. For the past two decades, the Secure Development Lifecycle (SDL) that Microsoft has implemented across the company has included a response phase that focuses on handling unforeseen issues and applying these learnings to future releases. We apply the infrastructure, processes, and best practices developed over the years through SDL to our AI systems. 
Across Microsoft, product teams are required to put in place repeatable processes to collect user feedback and to triage and address issues that arise after the release of an AI system. Teams are also required to build feedback collection mechanisms within their products so users can more easily report concerns. When possible, teams employ automation to enable quick action on well-understood problems. 
Potential incidents can be detected through various means, including automated detection, reports to the Microsoft Security Response Center's (MSRC) researcher portal, and employee reports,29,30 which can also be anonymous. All such reports are triaged and assessed by expert teams. If these concerns are assessed to warrant an incident response, appropriate teams are assembled and coordinated by response specialists, who manage mitigation, root-cause analysis, and communication. After an incident, a postmortem analysis distills learnings from the event, which are both folded directly into making changes to improve system robustness and studied to identify patterns and themes which in turn shape our policies, practices, and priorities, including updating the bug bar used by the MSRC to triage concerns. 
We also invest in crisis management to drive more consistency and efficiency in how we detect and respond to major AI issues and incidents. During major incidents, teams benefit from the expanded capacity of specialized roles like crisis managers, forensic investigators, and communications managers. As part of the product release cycle, we work with service teams to ensure they are connected to these central processes. 
MANAGE: MITIGATING AI RISKS 23
Looking across AI incidents 
Security research and incidents provide valuable insights into how we can improve the engineering and operation of our AI services. In 2024, we formalized a process that brings those insights together to educate our engineering teams and update our engineering processes. We draw insights from every reported issue, each incident we experience, and the experiences of other AI labs in the threat landscape, including nationstate actor analyses reported by Microsoft's Threat Analysis Center. 
Some key insights and learnings we gained through incident response in 2024 include the following: 
•  No incident-level events in 2024 were a result of AI system malfunctions or issues arising during benign use. Every incident included patterns of malicious use where actors were actively trying to bypass security measures or misuse Microsoft AI products or services. 
•  Threat actors identified in 2024 exhibited varying levels of sophistication, ranging from actors who worked in isolation to individuals who coordinated across a network of actors working towards the same goal. 
•  Threat actors often exploit differences in safety systems across different AI products and services, making it increasingly important to share the latest innovations in AI safety across the tech industry and with customers. • Not only are threat actors circumventing safety systems built around generative AI systems and models, they are also using generative AI as a tool (e.g,. using AI to power spear phishing attacks at scale31), as they would PowerShell32 or mimikatz.33  Defenders are best equipped to think of AI as another tool in attackers' toolboxes. 
We also draw insights from externally reported issues. When an issue is confirmed in an AI service, we open companion cases for other services using similar models to evaluate any impact. We also look broadly across reported issues to synthesize themes, which are then used to educate product and service teams, update engineering processes to catch them earlier, and update policies as applicable. 
Taking legal action against cybercriminals misusing AI 
In January 2025, a complaint unsealed in the Eastern 
District of Virginia revealed that Microsoft's Digital Crimes Unit observed that an international threat actor  group had developed sophisticated software to exploit exposed customer credentials scraped from public websites.34 In February, Microsoft filed an amended  complaint that named four of the primary developers of these malicious tools.35 These individuals, part of a global cybercrime network, unlawfully accessed accounts with certain generative AI services. They then altered the capabilities of these services and resold access to other malicious actors, providing detailed instructions on how to generate harmful and illicit content. 
Controls to promote responsible use and for limited access services 
Building on the responsible AI policies, processes, and practices that guide how we develop and deploy AI technologies, we have implemented other mechanisms to promote the responsible use of our technologies by our customers. For example, our enterprise contracts incorporate our AI Services Code of Conduct,36 which requires our customers to implement responsible practices (such as human oversight and access controls) and prohibits using our AI services in ways that inflict harm on individuals, organizations, or society, or affects individuals in any way that is otherwise prohibited by law. 
Upon our discovery of this activity, Microsoft revoked cybercriminal access, put in place countermeasures, and enhanced our safeguards to further block such malicious activity in the future. The court order also enabled us to seize a website instrumental to the criminal operation so that we could gather crucial evidence about the individuals behind these operations, decipher how these services were being monetized, and disrupt additional technical infrastructure we found. 
Seizing this infrastructure allowed us to effectively disrupt a cybercriminal network and create a powerful deterrent impact among its members. We take the misuse of AI seriously and remain committed to protecting users by embedding robust AI guardrails and safeguarding our services from illegal and harmful content. 
In addition to contractual obligations that apply to all of our AI services, we apply limited access restrictions for some of our AI services, such as our facial recognition technology, the custom neural voice AI-generated speech feature, and full configurability of content safety filters in Azure OpenAI Service.37 Use of these services is only available to approved customers and partners who meet a combination of controls calibrated to the risks of each service. 
These controls can include use case registration and pre-approval of use cases or restrictions on prohibited uses. For example, limited access restrictions require government agencies to meet strict criteria before gaining access to facial recognition services,38 and prohibit the use of the custom neural voice feature to impersonate political figures in a way that could mislead the public. Customers may also be required to re-verify the information they submitted to gain access to these limited access services to ensure it remains accurate, complete, and up-to-date. 
MANAGE: MITIGATING AI RISKS 25

Section 2 
                                                                                                                                                                                  upgrading the underlying models powering their generative AI applications, leveraging multimodal Throughout 2024, we    capabilities, and expanding support for additional How we make continued to refine our    languages. 
pre-deployment oversight       To best manage the high volume of cases and processes, which include   maintain a consistently high bar for release, we 
decisions about our deployment safety         developed resources that include tools, best practices, and instructions on how to map, measure, and process for generative AI         manage risks. We also established a wider network of employees, including Responsible AI Champs, to 
systems and models and                           help prepare product teams ahead of pre-deployment 
releasing generative AI                                    Sensitive Uses and Emerging    reviews with our experts. These preparation efforts often included helping teams take advantage 
Technology program. In of central tools and best practices and develop this section, we highlight appropriate documentation. 
systems and models                                    progress we have made in                                            Learnings gleaned across cases in 2024 helped to 
improving these processes,      inform and prioritize gaps in policy, practices, and tools. In the Map, Measure, and Manage sections of lessons we have learned, and         this report, we discuss in greater detail the progress 
examples of AI systems and and changes we made to our centralized responsible AI practices and tools to help product teams safely models that went through deploy their generative AI applications and models. these review processes. 
One of the ways we updated our predeployment oversight process for 
                                                                                                                                                                                           Deployment safety                                                               generative AI was by launching an 
                                                              internal workflow tool to further support for generative AI systems responsible AI documentation and 
review processes. This tool is designed and models to centralize the various responsible AI 
requirements outlined in the Responsible 
                                                              AI Standard into one central workflow Before deploying their generative AI applications, to reduce unnecessary toil and make teams review their risk management approach it easy for our teams to complete their with experts across the Responsible AI community. responsible AI work throughout the These experts provide further recommendations and development lifecycle. In mid-September, requirements grounded in our responsible AI policies, we released a reporting dashboard for with an eye towards maintaining a consistent risk our internal teams that allows us to 
management approach for generative AI releases track cross-company onboarding to the across the company. tool and completion of requirements. 
Regular updates are also shared with the 
In 2024, there were more than 1,300 generative AI Responsible AI Governance Community cases submitted to receive guidance from experts to support their use of the tool and across the Responsible AI community. As more keep them informed of the ongoing powerful, and in some cases, more cost-efficient improvements we are making to the tool. generative AI models became available for product teams to use, we saw more cases of product teams 
HOW WE MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT RELEASING GENERATIVE AI SYSTEMS AND MODELS 27



Measure and manage 
For each of the Phi model releases in 2024 and early 2025, the team used insights from red teaming to identify a combination of both internally developed measurement datasets and publicly sourced benchmark datasets to assess the prevalence of risks and the efficacy of mitigations applied. Following the break-fix framework, the team iterated through several rounds of measurement and mitigation steps, working closely with responsible AI experts to determine when the models were sufficiently safe for release. They compared the release candidates to other comparable models already on the market and carefully considered deployment methods (in this case, the model was both open source and made available through Azure AI 
Foundry).41 
Below we lay out steps the team took to measure and manage novel risks associated with each of the Phi model releases in 2024 and early 2025. 
•  Phi-3:  For the Phi-3 models, the team leveraged  a combination of internal and publicly available safety benchmark datasets to assess release candidate models through every break-fix round.  These included simulated adversarial conversation sets covering risk areas such as groundedness and susceptibility to jailbreak techniques, and external  benchmark datasets such as XSTest that was used to measure both appropriate and inappropriate refusal rates of the models.42 Red teaming and benchmark evaluation efforts informed subsequent safety data  curation and safety post-training as part of the break-fix approach. After several break-fix iterations,  the team observed an average of 75% reduction in the amount of harmful content generated by Phi-3  models, including Phi-3 Vision, which had significant  improvements for risks such as reading captchas and susceptibility to jailbreak techniques.43 
•  Phi-3.5: The availability and reliability of multilingual  safety evaluation and performance benchmark datasets continues to be an industry-wide challenge. To compensate for the limitations of any one approach or dataset, the team used a combination of measurement approaches, including simulated adversarial conversation sets in multiple languages and publicly available multilingual benchmark datasets. These datasets were used to assess Phi3.5 models' susceptibility to jailbreaking and their propensity to produce undesirable outputs across multiple languages and risk categories. 
 For this release, findings across the various evaluation  methods indicated that safety post-training efforts  had a positive impact across multiple languages and risk categories, as observed by higher rates of the model refusing to output undesirable outputs, including when jailbreak techniques were leveraged.  However, red teaming indicated the model sometimes generated refusals in English, even when the request for undesirable output was in another  language. These findings highlighted the need  for industry-wide investment in the development of high-quality safety evaluation datasets across  multiple languages that include low-resource languages and risk areas that account for cultural nuances where those languages are spoken. 
• Phi-4: When building the Phi-4 models, the team  employed several new techniques to unlock unique  capabilities and address risks observed in prior releases. They used additional data to enable audio and speech modalities, designed a new architecture for efficiency, enabled a larger vocabulary for  multilingual support, expanded safety post-training data to include more languages, and applied new post-training techniques to enhance the models'  ability to follow instructions and use external tools such as APIs. For this release, as for prior releases, the team ran both simulated adversarial conversation sets and publicly available benchmark datasets, often repeating similar evaluation approaches to prior releases for the same modalities. They found that for text and vision scenarios, Phi-4 models made significant safety gains when compared to prior  releases, including robustness to jailbreak techniques  and higher refusal rates to harmful prompts. 
 For the audio modality available in Phi-4 
Multimodal, in addition to simulated adversarial conversation sets, the team also evaluated performance differences across various demographic  groups for speech-to-text transcription use cases. Their evaluations focused on gender and age groups across multiple languages and found very minimal differences. The team also used red teaming to  test the model's ability to infer sensitive attributes from users' voices. They found that while the model inferred sensitive attributes in 27% of test prompts, the most common attributes being personality characteristics and country/region of origin, the use of a system safety message instructing the model not to infer sensitive attributes dropped this rate down to 0.4%. 
Additional details on testing results can be found in the technical reports and model cards that accompanied the Phi-3, Phi-3.5,44,45,46 and Phi-447,48,49 model collection  releases. These documentation practices play a key role in managing risks by empowering developers with the information they need to innovate responsibly with Phi models.  
Case study: Improving web search controls for Microsoft 365 Copilot 
Microsoft 365 (M365) Copilot is an AI-powered productivity tool that is integrated with M365 apps and services such as Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, Teams, and more.50 It offers intelligent assistance tailored to each application. For example, in Word, M365 Copilot can help create documents; in Excel, it can suggest formulas; in Outlook, it can summarize email threads; and in Teams, it can summarize meetings. These integrations allow users to boost their creativity, productivity, and skills across different applications. 
When a user enters a prompt, M365 Copilot uses a combination of models provided by the Azure OpenAI Service to generate responses in real time. To personalize responses, M365 Copilot utilizes content from Microsoft Graph, which includes a user's work emails, chats, and documents. It is core to the design of M365 Copilot that the application only displays data that the user has existing permissions to access. Responses may also be grounded in Internet-based content, which requires performing a web search based on the user's prompt.
As captured in the Transparency Note for M365 Copilot, the relevant product teams mapped, measured, and managed risks related to the use of the Copilot feature across M365 apps and services ahead of initial deployment and each subsequent release cycle.51 They completed all required privacy and security reviews, which are core tenets of 
Microsoft's approach to building AI responsibly. They reviewed their AI risk management approach with responsible AI experts from across Microsoft ahead of each release cycle and established mechanisms to monitor customer feedback. Once M365 Copilot was deployed, one recurrent request from customers was greater control over web search capabilities in their interactions with M365 Copilot. In early 2025, to continue earning customers' trust, Microsoft successfully attained the ISO/IEC 42001:2023 
certification for M365 Copilot and M365  Copilot Chat.54 ISO/IEC 42001:2023 is the first international standard for  AI Management Systems. It provides  organizations with a structured framework to responsibly develop,  deploy, and manage AI systems. 
Attaining this certification confirms  that an independent third party has  validated Microsoft's application  of the necessary framework and capabilities to effectively manage risks  and opportunities associated with the  continuous development, deployment,  and operation of M365 Copilot and  M365 Copilot Chat. 
Microsoft was a key contributor to  the conception and development  of the ISO/IEC 42001:2023 standard.  We remain committed to advancing  internationally recognized standards that help to establish consistent  practices, enhance accountability,  and foster trust in AI technologies.  If an IT administrator enables web search for the tenant, end users have the option to turn off web search by using the "web content" toggle across M365 Copilot available in each M365 app and service. 
This more granular control over web search in M365 Copilot was well received by many customers, including customers across financial services, automotive, and health and life sciences industries. 
Previously, access to web search in M365 Copilot was based on the M365 "optional connected experiences" setting enabled at the tenant level. This setting enables a single configuration that impacts a group of features, which led to the challenge that web search across 
M365 Copilot could not be configured separately.52 
Through the feedback channels that the product teams established ahead of M365 Copilot's release, customers expressed the need for more granularity when making data privacy control choices and requested the option to turn web search on or off independent from other features. 
Based on this feedback, in November 2024, Microsoft shipped the "allow web search in Copilot" setting, which allows IT administrators the ability to enable or disable web search in M365 Copilot for all users and user groups.53  HOW WE MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT RELEASING GENERATIVE AI SYSTEMS AND MODELS 31 HOW WE MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT RELEASING GENERATIVE AI SYSTEMS AND MODELS 33

Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies program 
Our Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies program continues to serve as Microsoft's review and oversight process for highimpact and higher-risk uses of AI. Through this process, we provide guidance for all types of AI systems, generative or otherwise. 
AI systems and models developed or deployed by Microsoft, whose foreseeable use or misuse meets one of the following criteria, are reported for Sensitive Uses review:
• Systems that could have a consequential impact on an individual's legal status or life opportunities, e.g., systems that prioritize access to healthcare services. • Systems that could present the risk of significant physical or psychological injury, e.g., workplace safety alert systems in industrial environments. • Systems that could restrict, infringe upon, or undermine the ability to realize an individual's human rights, e.g., computer vision-based systems deployed in public spaces that could restrict rights to assembly. 
The Sensitive Uses review process culminates in requirements that often go beyond the baseline, generalized requirements outlined in the Responsible AI Standard and related policies. The Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies team consists of a multidisciplinary set of experts who provide hands-on counseling for high-impact and higher-risk uses of AI, as well as research and guidance for emerging issues or novel AI technologies. The team includes members with backgrounds in engineering, cybersecurity, product management, public policy, international relations, user experience research, data science, social sciences, and law. The team's expertise is further augmented by professionals from across our research, policy, and engineering organizations with expertise in human rights, social science, privacy, and security, who lend their expertise on complex sociotechnical issues as part of the Sensitive Uses Panel. 
Throughout 2024, teams across Microsoft sought responsible AI guidance from the Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies team. The predominance of generative AI in these consultations-accounting for 77% of the cases-underscores its growing impact and the importance of addressing its challenges responsibly. The case studies that follow provide further insight into how the process works in practice. 
77% focused on of consultations generative AI 
Case study: Voice capabilities in Microsoft Copilot 
Microsoft Copilot (Copilot) is an AI-powered chat experience that aims to boost both creativity and productivity. Users can interact with Copilot to, among many things, brainstorm ideas, conduct research, create images, or simply have an engaging conversation. Using advanced AI models, Copilot reasons across multiple modalities to go beyond answering basic queries and focuses on providing users with a more personalized AI experience. As part of the broader Copilot relaunch in October 2024, the team building the system sought to leverage the audio capabilities of GPT-4o to provide a more natural conversational experience known as "Copilot Voice." 
Deploying an AI system with new modalities such as voice and audio introduces novel risks that warrant additional review and oversight. The Copilot Voice product team went through Sensitive Uses review, where they received hands-on consultation from the Sensitive Uses team. Through the review process, the team identified, measured, and mitigated risks associated with audio generation, as well as user voice inputs, before deploying Copilot Voice. 
Mapping risks 
The Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies team coordinated extensive red teaming conducted by both internal and external red teams. The red teams probed both the underlying GPT-4o model powering the Copilot Voice experience and the user-facing application with and without additional safeguards applied. The intention of these focused exercises was to produce harmful responses, surface potential avenues for misuse, and identify capabilities and limitations related to voice and audio scenarios. This process helped the product team better understand how the system could be used by a variety of users and helped improve mitigations. 
Measuring and managing risks 
Taking signals from red teaming, the product team conducted further evaluations through partially automated measurement pipelines. The Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies team worked closely with the product team to design broad coverage of risk areas with a focus on voice and audio-enabled risks. This included risks related to the system's ability to reproduce or mimic a person's voice, susceptibility to voice-based jailbreaking techniques, generation of third-party content, and more.
The measurement pipelines included a set of conversations, or interactions, with Copilot Voice collected from human evaluators and synthetic conversations generated with LLMs prompted to test policies in an adversarial fashion. Each of the newly developed conversation sets was annotated by human labelers who read the text content or listened to the audio output to validate the LLM-based evaluations.
These measurement efforts informed the development of a range of mitigations, including post-training, system prompts, and both input and output classifiers. For example, to mitigate the risk of the system reproducing or mimicking a person's voice, the product team implemented a mechanism to assess and block voice outputs from the system that diverge significantly from the set of voices the user can choose from.
Finally, the Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies team helped develop and review transparency documentation designed to equip users with information they need to use the product responsibly.55 The transparency documentation includes information about the AI-powered feature's capabilities, limitations, intended uses, and best practices for use. 

HOW WE MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT RELEASING GENERATIVE AI SYSTEMS AND MODELS 35
1.1  
22. 
33.By design, cases submitted to the Sensitive Uses and 
Emerging Technologies team tend to be applications of AI with complex risk profiles. This means that cases are  often fact-intensive and require bespoke engagement  and guidance. However, we observed several common trends in Sensitive Use cases in 2024: 
Use of generative AI has continued to accelerate, with emphasis on multimodal and agentic applications. 77% of Sensitive Use cases in the past year involved leveraging a generative model, deployments that increasingly have image- and audio-based capabilities. More recently, many of these cases have also involved agentic applications of AI, such as generative orchestration,56 which involves coordination of information flows between user input across one or more models and across additional tools and sources of data. 
Health and life science projects make up an increasing share of cases submitted. While the Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies team reviews cases across almost every industry, we receive a higher volume of health and life science submissions compared to any other domain. These projects typically involve administrative and decision-support tools for healthcare professionals and educational tools for patients. Deployment scenarios often meet two of our Sensitive Uses reporting criteria: Systems that could have a consequential impact on an individual's legal status or life opportunities (e.g., access to healthcare services), and systems that could present the risk of significant physical or psychological injury (e.g., systems designed to detect health conditions). Reviews for these features often focus on how the features can be evaluated for accuracy, both in the lab and once deployed, and how we can develop effective strategies to reduce risks from users over-relying on their outputs. 
The number of cases involving AI for scientific research has increased. We received more cases involving AI for scientific research in 2024 than in prior years. Microsoft's research and development efforts in the sciences are driven by experts in quantum physics, computational chemistry, molecular biology, software engineering, and other disciplines. Their work increasingly makes use of AI innovations. For example, in 2024, Microsoft's 
AI for Science research organization57 developed MatterGen,58 a generative AI tool designed to accelerate materials discovery with potential application in broad domains including batteries, magnets, and fuel cells. Given the many potential downstream applications of these research advances, the Sensitive Uses reviews typically focus on developing a detailed threat model, which is used to build customized research safeguards and deployment mitigations. 
In addition to the case consultation function, our Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies team develops early guidance for emerging AI technologies and risks. By identifying signals from Sensitive Uses cases, partnering with researchers and product strategists across Microsoft, and scanning the horizon of AI innovations, the team creates early-steer guidance ahead of broader, more formal policy development. This provides engineering teams with actionable recommendations when building with novel and emerging AI technologies. In 2024, this included drafting guidance for audio-based systems, image editing, and agentic AI systems. Early steer guidance also serves as a foundational resource for developing more formal internal policies and helps inform our public policy efforts around new AI models and  applications. 
Case study: Smart Impression 
Smart Impression is an AI-powered feature within a suite of productivity tools for radiologists called PowerScribe One. In radiology reports, the "impression" of the report refers to the section that summarizes all clinically significant findings and recommendations to inform downstream patient care. Smart Impression uses a language model to compose draft impressions based on a radiologist's findings. By enhancing the speed and accuracy of composing these impressions, Smart Impression can improve efficiency and reduce the risk of burnout among medical professionals. 
The use of generative AI in a healthcare decision support tool is a Sensitive Use case that warrants additional review and oversight. Through the Sensitive Uses review process, the product team received handson consultation to identify several key risks, including the possibility of generating impressions that don't align with findings included in the report-also known as ungrounded content. 
To measure and evaluate the risk of generating ungrounded content, the product team conducted both automated and human evaluations for each product release cycle, relying on practicing radiologists for their expertise. Their measurement approach tracked various types of discrepancies, such as the tool mentioning a finding that was not in the reference impression or report, and omitting the anatomic location or position of a finding present in the reference impression, among other variations. 
The product team put in place several layers of mitigation to align with the requirements issued by the Sensitive Uses and Emerging Technologies team, including: 
• User-initiated: The Smart Impression feature is off by default, meaning it cannot generate content without being invoked by the user and, if invoked, its final output can be discarded or edited. The radiologist has the option to write their own impression or invoke Smart Impression to generate draft impressions via a button push or voice command. •  Human review: If the Smart Impression feature is invoked by the user to generate draft impressions, a message is displayed to indicate that there is AI-generated content that needs to be reviewed for accuracy, which also triggers a workflow that prompts the user to review and approve it. The draft impression cannot be submitted into a patient's medical record without review and signoff by the radiologist. 
•  Feedback mechanism: Radiologists can submit concerns or feedback about their experience with the tool through the user feedback feature, which is used to make ongoing improvements to Smart Impression. 
•  Transparency: The team developed transparency documentation to equip radiologists with the information they need to use the Smart Impression feature responsibly. This documentation includes information about the AI-powered feature's capabilities, limitations, intended uses, and best practices for use. The transparency documentation is made available to Smart Impression customers by default. Prospective customers can get access to the transparency documentation upon request. 
In line with Microsoft's staged release approach, Smart Impression was released for private preview to a small set of practicing radiologists to gather real-world insights ahead of broader release efforts. The private preview included 40,000 radiology reports generated by over 100 radiologists from community care hospitals, private practices, and university hospitals in the U.S. In two rounds of focused interviews as well as three site visits, radiologists relayed that they found the results to be acceptable for use in real radiology interpretation scenarios and found the draft impressions to be helpful both in terms of time savings as well as reducing cognitive load. 
Before public preview, the product team used insights from interviews, feedback submitted by radiologists through the user feedback feature, and analysis of generated impressions that were accepted as-is or with minimal edits to make changes and improve performance of the model. By the end of public preview, half of the AI-generated impressions were accepted as-is, and almost three-quarters were accepted with only minor edits by practicing radiologists. Smart Impression is now available to radiologists across the U.S., and the team continues to monitor and address issues to improve outcomes for patients and healthcare professionals.HOW WE MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT RELEASING GENERATIVE AI SYSTEMS AND MODELS 37






Tools to manage risks 
In 2024, we released several new risk mitigation capabilities in Azure AI Content Safety for our customers to leverage as they build their own AI systems in Azure. These new mitigations expand risk mitigation support for multiple modalities, offer new deployment options, allow our customers to correct ungrounded content in real time, and build mitigations for custom risk categories.
One of the risks that can compromise both accuracy and trustworthiness in an AI system is its propensity to generate content that does not align with information from input sources, also known as ungrounded content. In March 2024, we introduced groundedness detection, a feature that identifies and filters ungrounded content in AI outputs, helping developers enhance the accuracy and usefulness of generative AI applications by pinpointing responses that lack a foundation in connected data sources. In September, we launched a preview of "correction," a new capability within Azure AI Content Safety's groundedness detection feature, for our standalone API offering.67  The correction capability corrects ungrounded AI outputs in real time before users encounter them.
To use groundedness detection, a generative AI application must connect to grounding documents or input sources from which to base its outputs. Once the correction capability is enabled, the detection of an ungrounded sentence triggers a new request to compare the flagged generated output against the grounding documents. The system will then either remove the sentence if no relevant content exists in the grounding documents or rewrite the sentence to better align it with the grounding documents. 
Also in September 2024, we launched our multimodal model in public preview in Azure AI Content Safety.68 The multimodal model analyzes materials containing both image and text content to help our customers make applications and services safer from harmful user-generated or AI-generated content. 
Key objectives of the multimodal model include: 
•  Detecting harmful content across multiple modalities: Analyzing both text and images (including emojis) to detect sexual, violent, and self-harm content and content related to hate and unfairness within text-image combinations. • Conducting contextual analysis across text and images: The combined elements of text and images may convey richer meaning than either mode alone. The multimodal model can analyze text and images that occur together to detect subtle or implicit harmful content that might not be evident when looking at the text or image in isolation. 
•  Moderating content in real time: The model also provides real-time detection and moderation to help our customers prevent the generation, sharing, or dissemination of harmful content across multimodal platforms as appropriate for their use case. This ensures our customers have the tools they need to address harmful content before it reaches users. 
In October 2024, we released the custom categories feature as part of Azure AI Content Safety, which allows customers to create and manage their own content moderation categories with two different APIs, depending on desired functionality. The custom categories standard API enables customers to define categories specific to their needs, provide sample data, train a custom machine learning model, and use it to classify new content according to the learned categories. The custom categories rapid API is designed to be quicker and more flexible than the         or privacy reasons. These features scan text or image standard method. It uses an LLM to quickly learn         content for sexual, violent, and self-harm content and specific content patterns, allowing customers to react    content related to hate and unfairness across multiple quickly and remediate incidents that are important to   severity levels.
their use case. 
In May 2025, Azure AI Content Safety introduced 
In 2024, we also released Embedded Content Safety, which allows customers to embed Azure AI Content   new security classifiers from Microsoft Defender, and Safety on devices.69 This capability is important both             capabilities to mitigate code vulnerabilities, redact for on-device scenarios where cloud connectivity might    personally identifiable information, monitor task be intermittent or unavailable and situations where             adherence for agentic AI systems, and offer more flexibility companies don't want cloud connectivity for security             for customers to customize their own mitigations.
Azure AI Content Safety 
                                                       Safety                                   Security 
•      Violence (text and imagery)                  •  Code Vulnerabilities PREVIEW 
•      Hate and unfairness (text and imagery)         •  Direct prompt injection attacks (jailbreaks) 
•      Sexual (text and imagery)     •  Indirect prompt injection attacks (XPIA) 
•      Self-harm (text and imagery)            •  XPIA spotlighting PREVIEW 
•      Protected materials (text and code) •  Defender security classifiers PREVIEW 
•      Task adherence monitoring (agents) •  PII redaction PREVIEW 
PREVIEW 
                                                  Quality                                    Custom 
•      Ungrounded outputs detection PREVIEW     •  Custom blocklists 
•      Ungrounded outputs correction PREVIEW    •  Custom severity thresholds 
(text and image) 
•      Custom categories (text) 
•      Per request policies PREVIEW 
•      Latency configuration 
TOOLING TO SUPPORT RESPONSIBLE DEPLOYMENT 43

TOOLING TO SUPPORT RESPONSIBLE DEPLOYMENT 45




Greater transparency the information searched by Copilot is relevant and appropriate. 
for search queries Since this update, web search query citations in Copilot (generally available for Microsoft 365 Copilot Business 
Chat and Microsoft Copilot) now include the exact 
web search queries derived from the user's prompt. 
    This information, which can be found in the linked To receive the highest quality responses from Copilot citation section of the Copilot response, allows users to and M365 Copilot, users have the option to allow understand what search queries and sites were used to Copilot to reference web content. In September enhance Copilot's answer. Web search query logging 2024, in response to customer interest in increased (generally available for Microsoft 365 Copilot Business transparency into the source material scanned by Chat) enables admins to perform search, audit, and Copilot, we announced new features that allow both eDiscovery on the exact web search queries Copilot users and admins greater visibility into Copilot-derived from the user's prompt. Admins, who were generated web queries.73 Providing transparency previously able to perform these actions for prompts into web queries furthers our goal of advancing and responses, can now extend those actions to search trustworthy AI by allowing customers to confirm that queries. 

AI literacy efforts We provide a range of public resources to help increase AI literacy for organizations and individuals, 
including AI courses that range from basic education 
Promoting AI literacy helps ensure that individuals on what AI is to technical training on responsible AI can make informed decisions regarding AI systems. development and use. Our Office of Responsible AI The EU AI Act requires that deployers and providers released an AI Literacy Starting Guide with training of AI systems "provide all relevant actors in the AI materials for vendors and customers targeted at value chain with the insights required to ensure the different roles and levels of knowledge.75 Microsoft appropriate compliance and its correct enforcement."74  Philanthropies also created an AI Skills Navigator, The AI Act does not require a one-size-fits-all literacy which leverages generative AI technology to enable program-rather, it leaves room for each provider learners to create personalized AI learning pathways and deployer to take into account the training and based on their background and experience.76 Lastly, experience of their personnel, the context of the AI in July 2024, the Older Adults Technology Services systems they use, and how AI systems will be used. (OATS) from AARP announced plans to develop and 
    deploy a training program to further AI education and literacy among American adults over the age of 50. Microsoft has an extensive knowledge base of AI This program will be funded by the Societal Resilience literacy materials developed over years of experience Fund, established by both OpenAI and Microsoft.77 in the field of AI. We offer a variety of AI literacy programs for our employees, with role-specific online 
learning paths tailored to their technical expertise While customers need to assess how literacy and the ways in which they develop, provide, and use requirements in the EU AI Act and other regulatory AI systems. Microsoft also integrates AI education efforts apply to them in the specific context of their into our annual Trust Code (Standards of Business organization, our AI literacy materials provide a Conduct) to ensure that all employees understand our useful starting point. As Microsoft and our customers 
Responsible AI Standard. continue to innovate with AI, we are committed to 
sharing our learnings and new materials so that every person and organization has the resources they need to build and improve their AI literacy. TRANSPARENCY TO SUPPORT RESPONSIBLE DEVELOPMENT AND USE BY OUR CUSTOMERS 49



Advancing the science Advancing the science In their research, they also identified promising defense  and development on Azure. These grants support 
of mapping risks of measuring risks mechanisms to defend against XPIA, including boundary awareness to help LLMs differentiate between user  research projects at both academic institutions and non-profit organizations focused on molecular biology  
prompts and external content, and explicit reminders and protein design, healthcare and drug discovery, 
    Researchers across industry and academia are uniquely  for the LLM not to execute instructions embedded in sustainability and earth sciences, personalized education Advancements in generative AI systems have enabled positioned to make meaningful contributions to external content.92 and accessibility, agriculture, human-AI collaboration, the development of agentic AI systems that are capable advance the science of AI risk measurement. Within and new approaches for AI privacy, safety, and security. of autonomously executing actions and collaborating Microsoft Research, the Sociotechnical Alignment Exploring ways to reduce inappropriate reliance on 
with other agents to achieve user-specified goals.  Center (STAC) continues to produce meaningful AI-generated output was a recurrent theme in research Foundation models continue to fuel a fundamental shift 
Building on prior research, researchers across Microsoft research and thought leadership in this area.84 Building throughout 2024. Researchers across Microsoft in computing research, natural sciences, social sciences, and computing education itself. The Accelerating are continuing to support our collective understanding on the four-part measurement framework discussed contributed to a growing body of work on fostering Foundation Models Research (AFMR) initiative was of the emerging risks associated with the development earlier in the report, the STAC team has published appropriate reliance. One study explored the impact of created by Microsoft Research to work with the broader and use of agentic AI systems, including the wide range papers that extend this framework to include the LLM's uncertainty expression, comparing first-person  academic research community to enable AI advances of failure modes with human-agent communication.80 systematization and operationalization of amounts, with general perspective.93 Another paper explored and nurture a vibrant and diverse AI research ecosystem 
    populations, and instances,85 as well as a set of general the risk of overreliance on generative AI and identified  by providing access to state-of-the-art foundation dimensions that capture critical choices involved emerging mitigation techniques such as uncertainty  models hosted on Microsoft Azure. The goal of AFMR Over the past year, Microsoft researchers, in in generative AI evaluation design.86 STAC has also highlighting, cognitive forcing functions, contrastive  is to foster increased collaboration across disciplines, collaboration with a broader set of researchers across published work to help bridge risk mapping and explanations, and AI critiques.94institutions, and sectors to unleash the full potential of academia and the technology industry, contributed measurement by investigating whether red teaming AI for a wide range of research questions, applications,  new approaches to advance existing responsible AI can produce measurements that enable meaningful Researchers also explored how to steer model behavior towards safer and more reliable outputs while and societal contexts. tools and practices, such as impact assessments and AI comparisons of systems.87 These research contributions 
documentation frameworks. This includes a study that advance our ability to better understand, interrogate, preserving performance. In one study, researchers To date, the AFMR research community has published explores the use of impact assessments by industry and compare different evaluation methods. explored inference time interventions where they first  over 300 papers co-authored by computer scientists researchers and contributes 10 design considerations identified features that mediated refusals and then  and researchers outside computer science, supporting  
to facilitate the effective design, development, and  Other Microsoft Research teams made additional assessed whether amplifying these features improved over 123 institutions in 19 countries.99 This depth adaptation of an impact assessment template for use in contributions that advanced the science of AI risk robustness to challenging multi-turn jailbreak attacks and breadth of expertise across disciplines, cultures, industry research settings and beyond.81 In May 2024, evaluation in 2024, ranging from studies that focus on while preserving model performance.95 and languages has contributed meaningfully to our researchers introduced the CLeAR (Comparable, Legible, the use of synthetic data, including in AI evaluation collective ability to use AI to address some of the Actionable, and Robust) framework, which aims to help tasks,88 releasing open-source tools such as practical world's greatest challenges around the following three practitioners consider the complexities and tradeoffs  evaluation tools to assess the safety of AI systems that Advancing AI research goals: 
required when developing documentation for datasets,  can execute code.89 As highlighted earlier in the report, beyond Microsoft • Aligning AI with shared human goals, values, and models, and AI systems throughout their lifecycles.82 the AI Frontiers lab provided meaningful thought 
leadership and scalable tools to fill gaps in benchmark  preferences via research on models to enhance 
evaluation practices across the industry. In addition to conducting our own research, we also safety, robustness, sustainability, responsibility, and 
support academic research by providing key resources transparency, while also exploring new evaluation 
Researchers also probed the potential risks associated for AI research. For example, last year, we announced methods to measure the rapidly growing capabilities with the use of conversational AI systems for social and our support of the National AI Research Resource of new models. emotional support. Through this study, researchers Advancing the science (NAIRR) pilot led by the National Science Foundation, 
developed a taxonomy and framework that advance our of managing risks which provides high-quality data, computational  • Improving human-AI interactions via understanding of AI behaviors, psychological impacts, resources, and educational support to make cutting-sociotechnical research, which enables AI to extend and the contexts in which these impacts may manifest. edge AI research possible for more U.S. academic human ingenuity, creativity, and productivity, while 
They recommend emphasizing AI interaction disclosure, Researchers across Microsoft continue to explore novel institutions and non-profits. Microsoft has committed  also working to reduce inequities of access and  specifically focusing on stressing the non-human nature  strategies to manage the risks associated with the use $20 million worth of Azure compute credits to working to ensure positive benefits for people and  of the system, and when sensitive topics are discussed, and misuse of AI. These include mechanisms to protect support researchers by providing high-performance societies worldwide. 
enabling the system to gracefully redirect the user to against indirect prompt injection attacks, reduce the 90 and develop novel computing resources and access to leading-edge • Accelerating scientific discovery in natural  
accessible and actionable resources.83 risk of overreliance on AI outputs,models.96 Our commitment to the NAIRR pilot also sciences through proactive knowledge discovery, 
approaches to steer model behavior. 
         includes collaborative opportunities with Microsoft's hypothesis generation, and multiscale multimodal Identifying novel strategies to defend against indirect scientists and engineers as well as resources to data generation. 
These research insights serve as critical inputs to prompt injection attacks (XPIA), an attack mechanism accelerate domain-specific research such as innovative  
Microsoft's AI policy development and oversight where threat actors embed hidden malicious tools for chemistry and materials science research via Working together as a global research community is efforts. For example, the Sensitive Uses and Emerging  instructions in a grounding data source to circumvent Azure Quantum Elements97 and tools for research and essential to realizing the promise of AI to benefit each  Technologies team collaborates closely with researchers safety guardrails, continues to be an area of interest development on AI fairness, accuracy, reliability, and individual, organization, and society as a whole. AFMR studying the risks of using conversational AI systems for for both practice and research. In 2025, Microsoft interpretability.98 is one means by which we make progress towards these emotional support, which informs how the team crafts researchers, in collaboration with researchers in goals. 
early-steer guidance aimed at providing engineering academia, developed a benchmark to assess the risk of To date, we have provided 38 grants for researchers teams with actionable recommendations. XPIA vulnerabilities in LLMs, now available on GitHub.91  across the U.S. to access critical resources for AI research HOW WE LEARN, EVOLVE, AND GROW 53

Advancing AI innovation and adoption through good governance 
Across jurisdictions, horizontal and issue-specific AI laws, norms, and standards are advancing at the same time. Horizontal approaches, such as the European Union's AI Act, address multiple layers of the technology stack, multiple sectors, and multiple issues, while narrower approaches focus on specific governance measures or topics, like synthetic media or frontier model safety. Microsoft engages in global efforts to build consensusbased frameworks, promoting coherence across borders,      
while instilling clear allocation  of responsibilities across the AI value chain. 
Content 
Previous waves of technology have demonstrated that there are two components to the trust that underpins broad adoption and iterative innovation: first, trust in how technology itself performs; and second, confidence that people and organizations can deploy it successfully. In order to continue to advance trust and confidence in AI, we must work towards globally coherent governance frameworks that can help accelerate adoption and allow organizations of all 
kinds to innovate and use AI across borders.    
 
 
 
 
Microsoft will continue to share the lessons learned  from our internal governance work so that others may  build on it, focusing on three key areas:  
• Strengthening feedback loops between  innovation and governance. We know even  
greater AI capability is on the horizon, with the opportunity to unlock innovation in science,  education, and countless other fields. AI deployment,  experimentation, and skilling must go hand-in- hand with AI governance to create tighter feedback  loops on what is effective in practice. We've learned  through implementing Microsoft's Responsible  AI Standard, that while minimum guardrails  provide an important starting point, we can learn  much more about how to govern AI technology  effectively in practice through AI deployment    and experimentation. Moreover, as we've learned             
    through establishing Microsoft's responsible AI         
program and developing role-based training, good       governance includes investing in people so that they       can take advantage of the capabilities that AI already    demonstrates and strengthen their readiness for             
the AI capabilities that may emerge. If we get this                    • Aligning expectations for guardrail  technology into the hands of more people who can          implementation. Today's AI systems often involve  
    apply it to the local challenges that they uniquely                     multiple models and components from different  
    understand, then we will not only have much greater       providers. For organizations deploying these systems to have confidence in each component and  
impact in realizing opportunities but also a much                     the system as a whole, it's important to align on  broader feedback loop on governance.                      expectations for guardrail implementation across  
• Advancing scientific understanding to inform   different actors in the supply chain. Building on    effective guardrails and practice. Over the past              developing industry norms, as Microsoft has done two years, stakeholders around the world have                through our Frontier Governance Framework100 to  come together to define high-level objectives for       address national security risks of highly capable  AI governance. As work towards interoperable            models, will help accelerate progress. Where        governance across borders continues, we are also            expectations for the behavior of AI applications  turning our attention towards building a deeper                   diverge among jurisdictions, focusing on where shared understanding of effective and easy to                guardrails can align-such as on expectations for adopt risk management techniques and technical        model-level transparency-will yield significant    practices that can help realize the high-level goals of         benefits for AI adoption and innovation.  these governance frameworks. At Microsoft, we are         
continuing to invest in our own internal governance     To make further progress in advancing AI governance,  frameworks, learning from their implementation          we must develop ecosystem-wide reference points  while also participating in multistakeholder efforts.   for effective guardrails as well as tools that support  Partnering with government research bodies,             implementation for ourselves and our customers.             such as AI institutes and centers for standards                 Just as internal investments in cybersecurity practices  and innovation, and collaborating on consensus-   and tools have enabled us to support the broader            driven publications like the International AI Safety      cybersecurity ecosystem, so too have our years    Report can help us close identified evidence gaps                    building an AI governance program readied us to  and synthesize research and applied learnings.           help others seize AI opportunities. We will continue  Frameworks for voluntary reporting on governance     to make such investments and work through practices, such as the Hiroshima AI Process Reporting          organizations like the Frontier Model Forum and Framework, can also help to deepen, align, and MLCommons to develop industry practice reference streamline shared expectations across jurisdictions.   points and AI evaluation tools.
ADVANCING AI INNOVATION AND ADOPTION THROUGH GOOD GOVERNANCE 55

Case study: AILuminate from ML Commons 
Developers and deployers of AI technologies have a            The AILuminate v1.0 benchmark assesses the safety shared interest in developing transparent and practical        of text-to-text interactions with a general purpose, safety assessments to guide development decisions,           English-language AI chat model by a naive, or inform purchasers and consumers, and support       moderately knowledgeable, user with malicious or standards bodies and policymakers. MLCommons      vulnerable intent. The MLCommons AILuminate leveraged this momentum to develop a new AI safety       benchmark evaluates an AI system-under-test by benchmark called AILuminate. To support this effort, inputting a set of 24,000 test prompts across twelve technical experts from Microsoft are part of the    categories of hazards. These responses are recorded MLCommons AI Risk and Reliability working group-a          and then evaluated using a specialized set of team of leading AI researchers from institutions    "safety evaluator models" to determine which of the including Stanford University, Columbia University,             responses are violations of the AILuminate Assessment and TU Eindhoven; civil society representatives; and          Standard guidelines.
technical experts from Google, Intel, NVIDIA, Meta, 
Microsoft, Qualcomm Technologies, Inc., and others.101 
                                                        During initial testing of a range of popular AI systems, none of the LLMs evaluated were given any advance In December 2024, MLCommons released AILuminate,           knowledge of the evaluation prompts or access to the a first-of-its-kind safety test for large language evaluator model used to assess responses. Microsoft's models (LLMs) that represents important progress   Phi-3.5 MoE Instruct (API) model received a grade of in developing research-backed, effective evaluation             "very good" on a five-point scale in which "very good" techniques for AI safety testing.102 The v1.0 benchmark     represents a four out of five. The development of this provides a series of safety grades for the most widely     benchmark is a critical step towards the formulation used LLMs and offers a scientific, independent analysis         of industry-standard testing to guide responsible 
           of LLM risk that can be immediately incorporated into              development, and one that is set to continue to 
           company decision-making.                                                      expand as MLCommons prepares to release versions in 
French, Chinese, and Hindi.
Working towards effective  and interoperable governance 
As AI is an international technology that is used across borders, it is especially important that governance frameworks across the world are interoperable and coherent. We continue to share lessons from our governance program around the world to help advance a coherent approach and build on the work we have done to date to advance interoperable governance. In May 2024, we published an e-book that features a series of case studies exploring the history and evolution of governance for technologies that are used across borders, including aviation and atomic energy.103 Drawing on this deep, expert insight, we came away with three high-level takeaways for AI: 
                           11 . AI governance involves three interrelated layers: 
industry standards, domestic regulation, and international governance. 
22 . At the international governance layer, three outcomes are important for AI: globally significant  risk governance, regulatory interoperability, and inclusive progress. 
33 . Four international governance functions will enable those outcomes: monitoring for and managing global risks, setting standards, building scientific  consensus, and strengthening appropriate access to resources. 
After publishing our global governance book, we led or participated in more than a dozen conversations with stakeholders around the world, including hosting events in Seoul, Tokyo, and São Luís, and joining events hosted by the Geneva Graduate Institute, the Eurasia Group in Toronto, the Tony Blair Institute and Centre for Governance of AI in London, Sciences Po and Renaissance Numérique in Paris, and Renaissance  Numérique in Brussels. 
During these conversations, stakeholders reinforced the importance of closing gaps between policy and science, as well as reaching consensus on how we define AI risk.  In September 2024, we published an updated version of the global governance book that incorporated insights gleaned from these conversations. We look forward to continuing this dialogue in 2025 and beyond. ADVANCING AI INNOVATION AND ADOPTION THROUGH GOOD GOVERNANCE 57






Footnotes 
1       From Risk to Reward: The Business Case for 11 Microsoft Threat Modeling. 22 EUREKA: Evaluating and Understanding Large  32 What is PowerShell? 
Responsible AI. www.microsoft.com/en-us/securityengineering/sdl/Foundation Models. learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/
clouddamcdnprodep.azureedge.net/gdc/gdcnUixiy/ threatmodeling www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/overview?view=powershell-7.5 
original eureka-evaluating-and-understanding-largefoundation-models/ 12 Microsoft Learn | Planning red teaming for large 33 Mimikatz. 
2       The Partnership of the Future - Microsoft's CEO language models (LLMs) and their applications. www.microsoft.com/en-us/wdsi/threats/malware-
explores how humans and A.I. can work together to learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/23 Eureka: Evaluating and understanding progress in AI. encyclopedia-description?Name=HackTool:Win32/
solve society's greatest challenges. concepts/red-teaming www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/eureka-Mimikatz slate.com/technology/2016/06/microsoft-ceo-satya-evaluating-and-understanding-progress-in-ai/ nadella-humans-and-a-i-can-work-together-to-solve-13 Microsoft Lessons from Red Teaming 100 Generative 34 Taking legal action to protect the public from societys-challenges.html 24 Azure AI announces Prompt Shields for Jailbreak and abusive AI-generated content. 
AI Products. 
    aka.ms/AIRTLessonsPaperf Indirect prompt injection attacks. blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2025/01/10/taking3       NIST AI Risk Management Framework. techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azure-ai-services-legal-action-to-protect-the-public-from-abusive-aiwww.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management- framework 14 AI Safety Institute Inspect. blog/azure-ai-announces-prompt-shields-for-jailbreak-generated-content/ and-indirect-prompt-injection-at/4099140 inspect.ai-safety-institute.org.uk/ 
4                      Microsoft Responsible AI Principles and Approach. 35 Disrupting a global cybercrime network abusing www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai/principles-and-approach 15 METR Vivaria. 25 Meeting the moment: combating AI deepfakes in generative AI. elections through today's new tech accord. blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2025/02/27/ vivaria.metr.org/ 
5                      Microsoft Responsible AI Standard, v2. blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2024/02/16/ai-disrupting-cybercrime-abusing-gen-ai/ blogs.microsoft.com/wp-content/uploads/prod/16 GitHub Azure/PyRIT. deepfakes-elections-munich-tech-accord/ 36 Microsoft Enterprise AI Services Code of Conduct. sites/5/2022/06/Microsoft-Responsible-AI-Standard-v2-
General-Requirements-3.pdf github.com/Azure/PyRIT 26 Deceptive AI-Generated Media: Election learn.microsoft.com/en-us/legal/ai-code-of-conduct 
Misrepresentation. 
6                      Frontier Governance Framework. Introducing AI Red Teaming Agent: Accelerate your www.microsoft.com/en-us/concern/2024elections 37 Limited Access features for Azure AI services. 17 
cdn-dynmedia-1.microsoft.com/is/content/ AI safety and security journey with Azure AI Foundry. learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/cognitivemicrosoftcorp/microsoft/final/en-us/microsoft-brand/ devblogs.microsoft.com/foundry/ai-red-teaming-27 Microsoft on the Issues | MTAC. services-limited-access documents/Microsoft-Frontier-Governance-Framework. agent-preview/ blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/tag/mtac/ pdf 
38  Azure AI services. 
18 STAC: Sociotechnical Alignment Center. 28 Microsoft and OpenAI launch Societal Resilience learn.microsoft.com/en-us/legal/cognitive-services/
7                      EU Artificial Intelligence Act.  www.microsoft.com/research/group/stac-Fund. face/transparency-note#government-and-
artificialintelligenceact.eu/ sociotechnical-alignment-center/ blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2024/05/07/international-organization-use-cases societal-resilience-fund-open-ai/ 
8                      Microsoft Enterprise AI Services Code of Conduct. 19 Evaluating Generative AI Systems is a Social Science 39 Welcome to the new Phi-4 models - Microsoft Phi-4learn.microsoft.com/en-us/legal/ai-code-of-conduct Measurement Challenge. 29 MSRC Researcher Portal. mini & Phi-4-multimodal. 
arxiv.org/pdf/2411.10939 
msrc.microsoft.com/report/vulnerability/new techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/
9                      At Microsoft, Responsible AI CVPs are senior leaders educatordeveloperblog/welcome-to-the-new-
in their division usually reporting directly to a leader at 20 A Shared Standard for Valid Measurement of 30 How to Report a Compliance Concern | Microsoft phi-4-models---microsoft-phi-4-mini--phi-4-
the Executive Vice President level. Generative AI Systems' Capabilities, Risks, and Impacts. Legal. multimodal/4386037 
arxiv.org/pdf/2412.01934 www.microsoft.com/en-us/legal/compliance/sbc/
10                    AI Ethics and Effects in Engineering and Research  report-a-concern 40 Phi-3 Safety Post-Training: Aligning Language committee and working groups leverage top scientific and  21 Dimensions of Generative AI Evaluation Design. Models with a "Break-Fix" Cycle. 
engineering talent to provide subject-matter expertise on arxiv.org/pdf/2411.12709 31 How AI is changing phishing scams. arxiv.org/pdf/2407.13833 
the state-of-the-art and emerging trends regarding the www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365-life-hacks/ enactment of Microsoft's responsible AI principles. privacy-and-safety/how-ai-changing-phishing-scams 63
41                    Phi-3 Safety Post-Training: Aligning Language 53 Data, privacy, and security for web search in 64 New GenAI simulation and evaluation tools in Azure 73 Introducing greater transparency and control for web 
Models with a "Break-Fix" Cycle. Microsoft 365 Copilot and Microsoft 365 Copilot Chat. AI Studio. search queries in Microsoft 365 Copilot and Microsoft  arxiv.org/pdf/2407.13833 learn.microsoft.com/en-us/copilot/microsoft-365/techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/aiplatformblog/Copilot. 
manage-public-web-access#controls-available-to-new-genai-simulation-and-evaluation-tools-in-azure-techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/
manage-web-search ai-studio/4253020 microsoft365copilotblog/introducing-greater-
42                    XSTest: A Test Suite for Identifying Exaggerated transparency-and-control-for-web-search-queries-inSafety Behaviours in Large Language Models. 
    microsoft/4253080 arxiv.org/abs/2308.01263 54 Microsoft 365 Copilot Achieves ISO/IEC 42001:2023 65 Unlocking the Power of Agentic Applications New 
Certification.  Evaluation Metrics for Quality and Safety. 
techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/devblogs.microsoft.com/foundry/evaluation-metrics-74 The European Union Artificial Intelligence Act - The microsoft365copilotblog/microsoft-365-copilot-azure-ai-foundry/ 
43                    Phi-3 Safety Post-Training: Aligning Language Act Texts.     
Models with a "Break-Fix" Cycle. artificialintelligenceact.eu/the-act/ achieves-isoiec-420012023-certification/4397144 arxiv.org/pdf/2407.13833  
66 Monitor your generative AI applications. 
44                    Phi-3 - A Microsoft Collection. 55 Transparency Note for Microsoft Copilot. learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-foundry/how-to/75cdn-dynmedia-1.microsoft.com/is/content AI Literacy Starting Guide.           /
aka.ms/Copilot-RAI-Transparency monitor-applications 
huggingface.co/collections/microsoft/phi-3-microsoftcorp/microsoft/final/en-us/microsoft-product-
6626e15e9585a200d2d761e3 and-services/security/pdf/microsoft-ai-literacy-starting-
56 Microsoft Copilot Studio - Generative Orchestrator. 67 Correction capability helps revise ungrounded guide-jan-2025-477720.pdf 
45                    Phi-3 Technical Report: A Highly Capable Language learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-copilot-studio/content and hallucinations. 
faqs-generative-orchestration techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azure-ai-services-
Model Locally on Your Phone. 76 AI Skills Navigator. 
blog/correction-capability-helps-revise-ungrounded-
arxiv.org/pdf/2404.14219 aiskillsnavigator.microsoft.com/en-us content-and-hallucinations/4253281 57 Microsoft AI for Science Lab. www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/lab/microsoft-
46                    Phi-3 Safety Post-Training: Aligning Language research-ai-for-science 68 Multimodal Public Preview Blog. 77 Grant Announcement: Microsoft and Open AI. Models with a "Break-Fix" Cycle. techcommunity.microsoft.com/blog/azure-ai-services-oats.org/grant-announcemnt-microsoft-and-open-ai/ arxiv.org/pdf/2407.13833 blog/multimodal-public-preview-blog/4253816 58 AI meets materials discovery - Microsoft Research. 
47                    Phi-4 - A Microsoft Collection. www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/story/ai-meets-69 Azure Cognitive Services (Azure AI) Application 78www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/academic AI & Society Fellows Program.    materials-discovery huggingface.co/collections/microsoft/phi-4-program/ai-society-fellows/ for Embedded Content Safety - Preview. 
677e9380e514feb5577a40e4 customervoice.microsoft.com/Pages/ResponsePage.
59 Microsoft announces new Copilot Copyright 79 AI Frontiers - Microsoft Research. aspx?id=v4j5cvGGr0GRqy180BHbR7en2Ais5p Commitment for customers. 
48                    Phi-4 Technical Report. xKtso_Pz4b1_xUOFhXTTNZWUNYTlVFOUZMQ www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/lab/ai-frontiers/ blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2023/09/07/copilotarxiv.org/abs/2412.08905 1JFSU1QSTFPOCQlQCN0PWcu copyright-commitment-ai-legal-concerns/ 
80 Challenges in Human-Agent Communication. 
49                    Phi-4-Mini Technical Report: Compact yet Powerful 60 Innovate with AI while complying with the EU AI Act. 70 EdChat: Pioneering Safe Generative AI in South Challenges in Human-Agent Communication - Multimodal Language Models via Mixture-of-LoRAs. www.microsoft.com/en-us/trust-center/compliance/eu-Australian Classrooms with Azure AI Content Safety. Microsoft Research 
arxiv.org/abs/2503.01743 www.microsoft.com/en/customers/www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
ai-act story/1751701319789621671-south-australia-human-agent-interaction-challenges/ department-of-education-azure-ai-content-safety-
50                    Microsoft 365 Copilot overview. 61aka.ms/rai Responsible AI at Microsoft.  higher-education-en-australia 81 Supporting Industry Computing Researchers in 
learn.microsoft.com/en-us/copilot/microsoft-365/
microsoft-365-copilot-overview Assessing, Articulating, and Addressing the Potential 
71 How Microsoft and LinkedIn gave users detailed Negative Societal Impact of Their Work. 
62  Azure AI Foundry. context about media on the professional networking www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
51                    Transparency Note for Microsoft 365 Copilot. azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/ai-foundry/ platform. learn.microsoft.com/en-us/copilot/microsoft-365/supporting-industry-computing-researchers-in-
         partnershiponai.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/casemicrosoft-365-copilot-transparency-note assessing-articulating-and-addressing-the-potential-
study-microsoft.pdf 
63  Model leaderboards in Azure AI Foundry portal. negative-societal-impact-of-their-work/ learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-foundry/concepts/
52                    Overview of optional connected experiences in Office.  model-benchmarks 72 LinkedIn Adopts C2PA Standard. 
learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365-apps/privacy/www.linkedin.com/pulse/linkedin-adopts-c2paoptional-connected-experiences standard-patrick-corrigan-kwldf/?trackingId=4
gnjmapwRsmugUNqwj0fRw%3D%3D&src=orsearch&veh=www.bing.com%7Cor-search 65
82                    The CLeAR Documentation Framework for AI 92 Benchmarking and Defending Against Indirect 102 Benchmark for general-purpose AI chat model. Transparency: Recommendations for Practitioners & Prompt Injection Attacks on Large Language Models. ailuminate.mlcommons.org/benchmarks/ Context for Policymakers. www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/ www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/the-benchmarking-and-defending-against-indirect-103 Global Governance: Goals and Lessons for AI. clear-documentation-framework-for-ai-transparency-prompt-injection-attacks-on-large-language-models/ aka.ms/AIGlobalGovernanceBook recommendations-for-practitioners-context-for-
policymakers/ 93 "I'm Not Sure, But...": Examining the Impact of Large 104 Global Perspectives: Responsible AI Fellowship • Language Models' Uncertainty Expression on User Stimson Center. 
83                    From Lived Experience to Insight: Unpacking the Reliance and Trust. www.stimson.org/project/responsible-ai-fellowship/ 
Psychological Risks of Using AI Conversational Agents. www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/im-
arxiv.org/pdf/2412.07951 not-sure-but-examining-the-impact-of-large-language-105 Advancing AI Responsibly - Global perspectives on models-uncertainty-expression-on-user-reliance-and-inclusive AI. trust/ 
84                    STAC: Sociotechnical Alignment Center - Microsoft unlocked.microsoft.com/responsible-ai/ 
Research. www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/group/stac-94 Overreliance on AI Literature Review. 106 AI and the SDGs in Latin America and the Caribbean. sociotechnical-alignment-center/ aka.ms/genai_reliance scioteca.caf.com/bitstream/handle/123456789/2331/
         AI%20and%20the%20SDGs%20in%20Latin%20 America%20and%20the%20Caribbean. 85 A Shared Standard for Valid Measurement of 95 Steering language model refusal with sparse pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
Generative AI Systems' Capabilities, Risks, and Impacts.  autoencoders. 
www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/a-arxiv.org/pdf/2411.11296 shared-standard-for-valid-measurement-of-generative-107 Artificial Dreams.  
ai-systems-capabilities-risks-and-impacts/ 96 Broadening AI innovation: Microsoft's pledge to the grandpalais-immersif.fr/en/agenda/evenementartificial-dreams                                                 /
National AI Research Resource pilot. 
86   Dimensions of Generative AI Evaluation Design. blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2024/01/24/108 National Youth Theatre and Microsoft launch 
www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/national-ai-research-resource-nairr-artificial-national programme to empower young creatives to dimensions-of-generative-ai-evaluation-design/ intelligence/ use AI. 
ukstories.microsoft.com/features/national-youth-
87   AI Red Teaming Through the Lens of Measurement 97 Azure Quantum Elements. theatre-and-microsoft-launch-national-programme-to-
Theory. quantum.microsoft.com/ empower-young-creatives-to-use-ai/ openreview.net/pdf?id=KEggQCeDUA 
98 Azure AI Foundry: Find the right model to build your 
88   Examining the Expanding Role of Synthetic Data custom AI solution. 
Throughout the AI Development Pipeline. cdn-dynmedia-1.microsoft.com/is/content/ arxiv.org/abs/2501.18493 microsoftcorp/microsoft/final/en-us/microsoft-brand/
documents/Microsoft-Frontier-Governance-Framework.
    pdf 89 RedCode: Risky Code Execution and Generation 
Benchmark for Code Agents. 99 Accelerating Foundation Models Research - Projects. 
www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/collaboration/ redcode-multi-dimensional-safety-benchmark-for-accelerating-foundation-models-research/projects/ code-agents/ 
       100 Microsoft Frontier Governance Framework. 90 Overreliance on AI: Literature Review. cdn-dynmedia-1.microsoft.com/is/content/ www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/microsoftcorp/microsoft/final/en-us/microsoft-brand/ overreliance-on-ai-literature-review/ documents/Microsoft-Frontier-Governance-Framework. pdf 
91 A benchmark for evaluating the robustness of LLMs and defenses to indirect prompt injection attacks. 101 MLCommons AI Risk and Reliability Working Group. github.com/microsoft/BIPIA mlcommons.org/working-groups/ai-risk-reliability/ai-
risk-reliability/ 67
