Table of Contents
AI for disability inclusion: Enabling change with advanced technology
Table of contents
Expand executive awareness of the power of AI to foster disability inclusion Chapter 1
What is "inclusive design"?
Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences Chapter 2
The hiring process
Life at work
Employee evaluations
R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles Chapter 3
Responsible
Accessible
Inclusive
Secure
AI: A worthy match for barriers to inclusion
Academics, regulators/ policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar Chapter 4
As a member of academia....
As a regulator or policymaker...
As an investor...
As a developer of AI...
Co-Authors
Special acknowledgements to the following people who contributed their expertise to this project:
Additional Accenture contributors
Methodology
About Accenture
About Accenture Research
Sources








AI for
disability
inclusion
Enabling change with
advanced technology




2
Introduction: Responsible and ethical AI
as an enabler of change
Chapter 1: Expand executive awareness of the power
of AI to foster disability inclusion
Table of
Chapter 2: Focus on the benefits; screen for and
eliminate potential for unintended consequences
contents
Chapter 3: R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles
Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers,
investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
3 | Introduction: Responsible and ethical AI as an enabler of change More than one billion people globally are
Our experience points to an overarching barrier: the
To that end, we will explore three foundational steps
living with some form of disability.
persistent, misguided perception that finding, hiring,
that organizations can take to help them leverage AI's
onboarding and developing persons with disabilities is
great potential as an enabler of change in this context.
Collectively, people with disabilities cross every age,
too difficult-not worth the effort and resources that
They are:
ethnicity, gender identity, race, sexual orientation,
an organization would have to extend to do so.
and socioeconomic status. In the United States,
• Expand executive awareness of the power of AI
26% of adults (one in four) have a disability. Yet
In this report, through collaboration with Disability:IN
to foster disability inclusion;
50% of this community in the US are more likely
and the American Association of People with
• Focus on the myriad benefits of AI while
to be unemployed than nondisabled1 people of
Disabilities (AAPD), we bring an evidence-based
screening for and eliminating the possibility of
working age.2
perspective to bear. Based on Accenture's ongoing
unintended consequences; and
study of persons with disabilities in the workplace, and
Why is that? What is keeping organizations from
• Use the R(AI)S guiding principles
advances in "human + machine" work, we see that
hiring more people with disabilities? After all, the
(Responsible, Accessible, Inclusive, Secure)
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-when developed and used
business case for tapping individuals from this vast to inform decision-making about using AI to
responsibly and ethically-has the potential to
and highly talented pool of individuals has been made.
improve inclusion.4
facilitate the entire employment journey for persons
Hiring more individuals with disabilities can help
with disabilities. It can help organizations identify
improve performance and position organizations for
candidates (and vice versa). It can enable engagement
long-term growth.
at work. And it can drive a culture of confidence in
this underutilized segment of the workforce while
supporting advancement within organizations.3
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

4 | Introduction: Responsible and ethical AI as an enabler of change Accenture views AI as a constellation
of technologies that allow smart
As recent headlines attest (and as that second step
machines to extend human capabilities
acknowledges), AI can be a double-edged sword.
by sensing, comprehending, acting,
One global survey of risk managers found that
58% identify AI as the biggest potential cause of
and learning, thereby allowing people
unintended consequences over the next two years.
to achieve much more than they could
Only 11% in that study described themselves as
on their own. These technologies
fully capable of assessing the risks associated with
include natural language processing,
adopting AI organization-wide.5 The risk that AI could
computer vision, and other applications
create or exacerbate existing barriers to employment
of machine learning recognition.
or engagement at work, and the ancillary risk of
liability, is real.
It's worth noting that in April 2021, the European
We have developed this report with these concerns
Commission took a major step toward a new
top of mind. There's no doubt that the work of taking
regulatory framework to address high-risk sectors and
these steps is hard; it requires dedication. And it is
applications, including recruitment, facial recognition
worth it. Designing, developing, and using responsible,
technology, and applications linked with workers' and
ethical AI can tap the incredible potential of talent
consumers' rights.6
with disabilities, while helping all workers reach their
potential. Getting this right helps everyone thrive.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

Expand executive
awareness of the
power of AI to foster
disability inclusion
Chapter 1
6 | Chapter 1: Expand executive awareness of the power of AI to foster disability inclusion While 84% of C-suite executives believe they must
with disabilities. This work includes independent
comfortable being open and giving their input. It's a
leverage AI to achieve their growth objectives,7
algorithmic assessments and auditing and adoption
vicious cycle; as Accenture's global Getting to Equal
most haven't put AI to work to advance growth
of inclusive design principles. It ensures that AI
2020: Enabling Change research illustrates, 76% of through inclusion. Our research suggests one key
solutions are designed-and their underlying
employees with disabilities and 80% of executives
reason: Many are not fully aware of the barriers to
data are assessed-as rigorously as possible to
with disabilities are not fully open about their
inclusion that may exist in their organizations. While
prevent unintended consequences such as bias
disabilities at work. While some disabilities result in
67% of C-suite respondents believe they've built a
and discrimination. Yet just 37% report that they
a form of forced disclosure (mobility challenges, for
supportive workplace that enables their disabled
have inclusive design principles in place to support
example, are apparent), many people with disabilities
employees to thrive with the right technology,
"human + machine" collaboration9-essential to the
can and do successfully conceal a disability such as
environment and support, only 41% of employees
development of fair and unbiased AI solutions. (See
dyslexia, autoimmune diseases like multiple sclerosis,
with disabilities agree.8
the page, "What is 'inclusive design'?")
or chronic mental illness.
The majority of executives, 78%, believe their
Finally, there is the lack of disability representation
organizations will be able to leverage AI solutions to
in data sets and this remains a critical source of
address barriers to including persons with disabilities
bias-and it's an issue whose solution rests, in part,
over the next three years, particularly in the area
on culture. Fostering a positive culture of safe self-
of accessibility. To achieve this goal, they must
disclosure is vital to achieving responsible and ethical
fully understand the vital impact of "advance work"
AI. Organizations can't incorporate the perspectives
needed to deploy ethical AI that benefits workers
of employees with disabilities if people aren't
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology








7 | Chapter 1: Expand executive awareness of the power of AI to foster disability inclusion What is "inclusive design"?
Inclusive design considers the needs of all users
Ideally, accessibility (the "what") and inclusive
as a product or service is being developed, from
design (the "how") work together to make
start to finish. With inclusive or human-centered
experiences that are not only compliant with
design, a person with a disability is simply
standards, but truly usable and open to all.
another individual with specific lived experiences.
And the "why": Together, inclusive design and
Organizations that design for diversity and edge
accessibility can allow teams to build more diverse
cases, including individuals with disabilities, will
products, attract talent, ensure product teams are
create better solutions and experiences for all users.
representative of the diversity of the customers
we serve, and help identify new opportunities for
Microsoft defines inclusive design as a
revenue growth.
methodology, born out of digital environments,
that enables and draws on the full range of human
Failing to accommodate and co-create solutions
diversity. The company notes that "exclusion
with and for employees with disabilities can be
happens when we solve problems using our own
very costly: According to the Equal Employment
biases. As Microsoft designers, we seek out those
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) in the US, over
exclusions, and use them as opportunities to
24,000 disability discrimination charges were filled
create new ideas and inclusive designs."10
with the agency in 2019. The EEOC's enforcement
efforts have amounted to $116M in monetary
Effectively incorporating inclusive design into the
benefits to plaintiffs.12
way organizations create products and services
requires adopting a new culture. Organizations
need to take charge, consciously integrating
accessibility, diversity and inclusion into their
ways of working.11
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

Focus on
the benefits;
screen for and
eliminate potential
for unintended
consequences
Chapter 2
9 | Chapter 2: Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences AI has the potential to tackle some of the world's
Consider, too, the extent to which racial bias is
most intractable challenges, but only if the underlying
imbued in facial recognition, detection, and related
One tool developed by Accenture's
algorithms and the data set powering them are
technology. Research has found divergent error rates
Responsible AI unit15 has the
trustworthy and free of bias. Biases often occur
across demographics, with accuracy rates being
potential to help address bias. The
at the intersections of disability, race, gender, and
lowest for women, Black people and those 18-30 years
other identities.
old. How might the technology perform when adding
Algorithmic Assessment Toolkit uses
aspects of disabilities that cause disfigurement or
statistical methods to identify when
Case in point: A popular AI software that attempts
facial differences?14
groups of people are treated unfairly
to predict how a candidate will perform on the job
by analyzing factors on display in their job interview
To ensure that AI is helping and not inadvertently
by an algorithm and visualizes
such as gestures, tone, and cadence. This software
working against the inclusion of all people with
the impact of potential corrective
has been called out by experts as dangerously biased
disabilities, regardless of gender, race, etc., it's
measures.16 It's important to point
against persons with disabilities, who might present
critical to assess the potential consequences of
out that the tool has not yet been
with a range of characteristics that would not hinder
AI deployment on every part of the employment
used for the purpose of detecting
their work performance but could affect how their
experience. In this report, we focus on three areas:
potential is scored.
bias on the basis of disability, but if
13
the hiring process, life at work, and employee
evaluations.
the desired variables were defined
with set parameters, and there
is agreement on the threshold
considered to be "fair," and the right
data is available, it could be used for
that purpose.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
10 | Chapter 2: Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences The hiring process
Research shows that approximately 76% of
(including physical, cognitive, sensory, visible,
organizations with 100 or more employees use
and invisible).
It is possible to navigate potential pitfalls
algorithms to assess performance on hiring tests,17
The issue can be further compounded if the "fix"
by allowing people who are applying for a
and 40% of organizations use AI when screening or
is not appropriate. Simply adding in that data may
job to tailor their interview or assessment
assessing candidates during recruitment.18
not be the solution. Here again, design matters
experience, as needed. Candidates who
These systems have become much more
enormously. Disability should not only be considered
may need more time to answer questions, or
sophisticated in recent years. Many of the new AI
as a stand-alone category, but rather carefully
who may not be able to convey their talents
tools for employment use neuroscience principles to
examined regarding intersectional identities. Those
adequately in a video interview scenario,
perform pre-employment assessments of candidates.
responsible for sourcing and including such data must
for example, can work with a talent advisor
Some tools aim to measure cognitive and emotional
scrutinize who defines disability and how.
or similar role to develop the best scenario
20 Programs
features of the candidate, while specifically trying to
that evaluate cognitive performance, for example,
for them. (Of course, candidates must be
avoid demographic (race, gender) bias through an
could fail to recognize how neurodiversity plays
notified - ahead of time - about how the
auditing process of the data that is present within the
into candidates' responses. Plus, assessments that
interview or assessment tool works. That
tool's algorithms.
way, an informed decision can be made
19 They seek to match candidates'
evaluate employees based on algorithmic perception
performance against that of existing employees
of their facial expressions, tone of voice or movements
whether or not an accommodation is
who have succeeded in the same role for which the
can penalize candidates with disabilities. They may
needed, including allowing or disallowing
organization is hiring.
also constitute unlawful pre-employment disability-
automated decision-making used to
related inquiries and/or medical examinations
evaluate performance.)
However, employers that use AI for pre-employment
under federal anti-discrimination law. And timed
assessments may unwittingly make unfair decisions.
assessments can be unfair to people with disabilities,
The data they gather, for example, may not include
including those who use assistive technologies.
considerations of disability in all its variations
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
11 | Chapter 2: Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences Life at work
Lacking inclusive design and accessibility, both
These kinds of tools are not one-and-done
built and digital work environments can be difficult
solutions-nor are they one-size-fits-all. As AI-based
Consider technology that describes
to navigate if one has a disability. In some cases,
systems become an integral part of HR processes
people, text and objects aloud
an individual may feel they have to do two jobs to
and the workplace, it's important to assess whether
for those with low vision. AI-
accomplish one, with the first job being the task of
each tool is needed and, if so, what it is doing to
overcoming obstacles so that they can perform their
help employees thrive at work and to leave them
powered tools and apps such as
actual job. AI-powered advances in accessibility, such
net better off.
Blindsquare22 seek to help those
as predictive text, speech-to-text transcription, and
with visual impairments navigate
AI is also enabling immersive learning environments
voice and visual recognition have great potential
using extended reality (XR) technologies-virtual,
their travel and work environments
to help organizations eliminate some of these
augmented and mixed reality (VR, AR and MR)-in
independently. There are also new
barriers-and comply with the law in the process.21
customer-service training sessions. These tools closely
solutions that operate computers
The caveat is the need to foresee, avoid (and be ready
mimic real-life situations and allow employees to gain
to mitigate) negative impacts.
via eye movements. Technologies
greater levels of knowledge in less time than they
like these can improve the lives of
would through more traditional "on-the-job" training.
employees with disabilities and have
the potential to enable employers to
meet their legal obligations in a cost-
effective way.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
12 | Chapter 2: Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences As this technology and its use cases become more
Walmart leverages VR training for
sophisticated by the day, employers must be cautious
when procuring and utilizing XR tools to ensure
its associates in order to increase
that they work for everyone. For example, a lack of
employee engagement around
captioning24 is an issue, and individuals with limited
areas such as empathy, diversity
mobility can't use VR without assistance. Even with
and inclusion in their customer
a headset on, many can't make the head or body
experience as well as compliance
movements required to get the full experience.
Disabilities such as autism and anxiety can also make
training.23 Leveraging these tools
using VR difficult or even harmful. Fortunately, there
for on-the-job training helps
are some worthwhile initiatives underway to address
employees navigate a variety of
XR accessibility (XRA) concerns, such as PEAT's
situations and experiences in virtual
Future of Work25 project and the XRA Developers
"practice worlds" (where mistakes
Guide26 for accessibility and inclusive design in
don't matter).
immersive experiences. (See the page, "What is
'inclusive design'?")
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

13 | Chapter 2: Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences Employee evaluations
Using AI-powered tools, managers can extract
sponsored social activities. On the surface, those
valuable insights from employees about their
seem like viable metrics. But what if a person with
strengths and areas for improvement and the ways
disabilities is unable to attend work-sponsored social
in which their learning experience and environment
activities due to a lack of accessibility? What if travel
could be customized to support higher levels of
to/from work must happen at certain times due to
engagement and job satisfaction. AI-driven feedback
their personal needs or transportation availability?
can help organizations assess employee performance
What if an employee relies on paratransit which is
based on historical data and achievement of current
often delayed? What if an employee's schedule is
metrics and suggest recommendations that can help
affected by the need to care for a disabled relative, a
individuals and groups achieve greater performance
child or an elderly parent? The results will be skewed,
levels going forward.
likely against employees who stand out for any of
these reasons though they have nothing to do with
Such tools, however, must consider the range
engagement, productivity, or loyalty.
of needs and behaviors they may encounter in a
given group of people if they're going to generate
How do organizations avoid having such measures
worthwhile insights. Suppose, for example, that
result in unfair practices, unlawful disparate treatment
an organization is seeking to figure out whether
or impact based on an employee's protected
employees are likely to remain there or pursue
status? How can organizations prevent AI tools from
employment elsewhere. And suppose to do this, it
mistreating or excluding otherwise successful and
uses AI-powered analytics to scan data from different
productive employees?
aspects of worker behavior, such as attendance,
arrival/departure times and participation in work-
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

14 | Chapter 2: Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences In the first instance, organizations should ask the
This is an especially important tactic since,
question outright: Who might be unintentionally
again, organizations are struggling to create a
excluded from using a given product (or service)
culture of safe self-disclosure which impacts the
and how will this (product or service) avoid bias
availability of reliable, trustworthy datasets. Plus,
if the employee has a disability? This will help
organizations must ask if it is always appropriate to
to unearth potential gaps and opportunities.
make inferences based on data regarding disability.
Bear in mind that not all platform vendors offer
By anonymizing and aggregating employee
accessible alternatives to their products, and that
activity data, the risk of any bias creeping in while
if a person needs to ask for help using a given
measuring engagement can be mitigated.
product, they may be compelled to disclose a
disability even if they would prefer not to. Tools can
employ mechanisms that seek to prevent bias or
discrimination or unwanted disclosure. Some AI-
powered analytics tools and platforms, for example,
collect data and feedback from each employee
not only by asking questions but also through
anonymized, opt-in collaboration analytics.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
15 | Chapter 2: Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences While the rewards are ample and the ethical and legal
With these foundational moves made,
compliance imperatives are strong, the journey to
organizations are better positioned to
inclusion is not straightforward. Where to begin? It
unleash the power of AI for all-while
starts with your people: Organizations have to take
steps to encourage a positive, safe culture of self-
working toward eliminating biases and
disclosure and inclusion (that can start with leadership
sparking more innovation and growth for
disclosing their own disabilities). At the same time,
the organization too.
employers must respect that they cannot lawfully
require self-disclosure of a disability.
The second necessary shift is one toward inclusive
design and development of AI: All technological
changes or implementations in an organization should
be executed with these principles in mind, especially
in light of self-disclosure and data privacy issues.
Finally, leaders should take a strong, uniform, visible
stance on process and governance: Transparency is
key to any inclusion effort, and more so when complex
capabilities like AI are under consideration.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

R(AI)S your AI
game with guiding
principles
Chapter 3
17 | Chapter 3: R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles To make sure that AI positively impacts people with
disabilities and helps them achieve their goals,
Responsible
Inclusive
employers can look to the set of guiding principles
means adopting and scaling AI responsibly and
means taking action for fairness in/with AI: Use
we call R(AI)S (for Responsible, Accessible, Inclusive,
ethically; innovating with purpose; and placing
inclusive design approaches that incorporate
and Secure).
a premium on compliance, accountability,
the lived experience of persons with disabilities,
transparency and explainability.28
and debiasing techniques to create a culture of
These principles synthesize insights from expert
equality and inclusion.
interviews, research from the Berkman Klein Center
for Internet and Society at Harvard University,27 as
well as a host of published AI principles from around
the world. At a high level:
Accessible
Secure
indicates that all AI endeavors put a premium
at one level means ensuring that using AI will not
on accessibility and that includes features and
put data privacy at risk. However, it also recognizes
functionality of the tool itself, the capabilities of
security in the sense that individuals should not
vendors involved, the experience of the person
need to ask for help because of their disability
with disability surrounding its use.
(thus potentially depriving them of the autonomy
and privacy that would otherwise be protected
when using the technology).
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
18 | Chapter 3: R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles To cover these four areas comprehensively,
we recommend that employers ask themselves the
framing questions listed below. The answers-followed
up with "how can we do this better?"-will suggest
outlines for a plan of action, which will be unique to
each organization. Inspiration can also be drawn from
examples of organizations that have demonstrated
significant advancement in particular areas, as called
out for each principle.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology




19 | Chapter 3: R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles Responsible
Salesforce
• Are we assessing and communicating how our investment in or Salesforce's commitment to inclusive, ethical AI
use of AI-powered systems impacts employees and/or candidates
became even more important when its Einstein AI
throughout the employee lifecycle, particularly those who might be technology was made available across its products.
The company founded the Office of Ethical and
adversely affected (e.g., due to disabilities, race, gender, etc.)?
Humane Use as a part of its Office of Equality, which
• Have we engaged an independent team responsible for evaluating represents diversity of all kinds, including disabilities.
whether AI is used for its intended purposes? Is that team
Its Office of Ethical and Humane Use developed
empowered to stop deployment until negative impacts are assessed a framework for Responsible AI and implements it
across the company. In addition to ensuring data
and eliminated?
privacy and security, Salesforce trains its employees
• Are we open about the AI-based tools we build and/or use for the to recognize harmful stereotypes in AI algorithms and
purpose of recruiting and interviewing candidates for hire? Do their consequences. In case of issues, Salesforce's
recruiters, candidates, and hiring managers/staff know these tools ethical AI framework lists steps to solve them, such
as communication with affected communities,
exist, what they do and why, and how to access them?29
protection mechanisms, commitment to transparency,
• Are we providing accessible alternatives and complaint channels for and a Data Science Review Board.30
employees and/or candidates with disabilities who need to report they may be disadvantaged by AI-powered tools for any reason?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology




20 | Chapter 3: R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles Accessible
Microsoft
• Have we appointed or established a Chief Accessibility Officer, Responsible AI is a group effort at Microsoft. In
Office of Accessibility, executive sponsor, and/or leadership team addition to appointing a Chief Accessibility Officer
champion to oversee and be accountable for accessibility efforts?
and having a CEO eager to speak on the topic,
the Office of Responsible AI sets company-wide
• Are we engaging employees with disabilities in our accessibility guidelines and governs their implementation.
efforts including, but not limited to, usability testing?
Responsible AI Strategy in Engineering (RAISE) is an
initiative the engineering team built to enable the
• Are we embedding accessibility into our relevant policies and implementation of responsible AI rules and processes
any commitments to ethics and corporate citizenship, and are we across engineering groups. The Aether Committee,
monitoring progress and regularly seeking feedback from a wide established in 2017, advises senior leadership on
range of stakeholders, including employees with disabilities, ERG
issues, best practices, and R&D opportunities. Aether
members, and the public?
organizes working groups that focus on areas such
as fairness and inclusiveness. Together, these three
• Are we defining accessibility and usability as a requirement in groups put principles into practice. Outside of the
our procurement contracts with tech vendors, including AI tool company, Microsoft's AI for Accessibility program
vendors, and regularly testing for it? Likewise, are we evaluating provides seed grants to developers, universities,
vendors with these capabilities top of mind?31
inventors, and NGOs that are creating solutions or
products to assist people with disabilities with "work,
life, and human connections." Microsoft then connects
the most promising projects with their internal teams
and experts to help them scale. Finally, Microsoft
pledges to bring inclusive design to its products.32
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology




21 | Chapter 3: R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles Inclusive
The American
Association of People
• Are we directing and/or incentivizing our talent development with Disabilities (AAPD)
teams (internally and externally) to use inclusive design principles?
Are there consequences for failing to adhere to these principles?
AAPD is leading the Start Access initiative with support
• Are we proactively assessing risk of role displacement as a result from Verizon and the Partnership on Employment and
of AI and providing inclusive and accessible ways of reskilling and Accessible Technology (PEAT). The program is focused
training employees who may be affected?
on AI-enabled tools that are increasingly used in
• Are we conducting regular fairness assessments/audits of
talent acquisition to source, screen, onboard and train
employees, particularly as organizations move rapidly
algorithms (and the underlying dataset(s)) to understand and act to virtual spheres which will endure post-pandemic.
upon any potential negative impacts our AI tools could have for Start Access aims to build and convene an engaged
persons with disabilities and other at-risk communities (e.g., based stakeholder community from across the startup
on gender, race or age)?
ecosystem to promote "born accessible" solutions such
as inclusive development teams/co-design, inclusive
datasets, algorithmic fairness tools and techniques, and
transparency/accountability practices.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology




22 | Chapter 3: R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles Secure
Telefónica
• Do we have an internal governance model in place ensuring safe, In October 2018, Telefónica's Executive Committee
secure and fair deployment and operation of AI systems?
adopted its own AI Principles along with a governance
model to ensure effective implementation within
• Are we increasing investment in the security of our AI systems?
the company. The first principle, Fair AI, states that
• When assessing candidates for employment and using AI-based algorithms should not discriminate against people
tools, do we recognize that candidates with disabilities have the with disabilities or other protected classes such as
race, gender, religion, or other personal conditions.
same reasonable expectations of privacy as do other candidates?
Telefónica promises to monitor data sets for unfair bias
• Is accessibility understood to be a key element of privacy and or discrimination, and to optimize algorithms while
security for people with disabilities, enabling independence
considering their impacts. Further, the company will
and freedom from having to ask for help? Is accessibility also be explicit about what personal or non-personal data
is used and for what purpose. Users will know they are
understood to be a key element of protecting system security
interacting with AI tools, that their data is secure, and
because it eliminates the need for third parties to access systems practices are compliant and lawful. This extends to any
designed for independent use?
third-party AI tool Telefónica employs.33
• Are we actively avoiding finding or using information that
should not be considered while using AI-based tools for
recruiting purposes?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

23 | Chapter 3: R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles AI: A worthy match
for barriers to inclusion
AI-based tools have the potential
to be a worthy match for
the barriers to inclusion that
persons with disabilities face
along the employment journey.
By responsibly and ethically
blending advanced technologies
with human ingenuity-and
empathy-organizations can clear a
path for a large group of people who
are ready to contribute, innovate and
grow their organizations.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

Academics,
regulators/
policymakers,
investors, and
developers can also
R(AI)S the bar
Chapter 4







25 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar While employers must be powerful advocates
and drivers for the ethical implementation of AI,
"How shall we do that?"
organizations also need the engaged support
of all stakeholders. Academics, regulators/
policymakers, investors, and developers (with and
without disabilities) must also work in concert with
organizations and persons with disabilities to realize
the full potential of AI-based inclusiveness. In that
"How can we better
spirit, we offer a set of R(AI)S questions for each of
these stakeholder groups to consider:
our efforts here?"
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
26 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar As a member
of academia....
Recognize that your role can have
Responsible
Accessible
tremendous and direct influence; your
• Are we fostering discovery and innovation in the area of
• Are we encouraging/fostering R&D in the area of AI for
ability to examine both the big picture
AI-powered systems, and to what extent are we involving
accessibility through convenings, thought leadership,
and individual cases with objectivity and
persons with disabilities when doing so?
relevant programs and initiatives, and are we doing so
informed curiosity, and your willingness
• With input and leadership by people with disabilities,
with the support and input of disabled people?
are we considering how our research and development
• Are we funding or seeking funding for initiatives and/
to share your analyses widely, with
(R&D) of AI-based systems impacts people with
or programs/degrees that focus specifically on the
conviction, can meaningfully shift the
disabilities, particularly along the employment journey?
area of accessibility with the support and input of
trajectory of discussion and solutions.
• Are we advancing the quest for standardized frameworks,
disabled people?
Keep in mind, always, that the design
data labeling and auditing methods for AI systems,
specifically to ensure disability inclusion?
and execution of projects focusing on
persons with disabilities must include
members of this community. Ask the
following questions, and follow each one
with: "How shall we do this?" or "How
can we better our efforts here?" Each
answer will bring your action plan into
clearer focus.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

27 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar As a member
of academia....
Inclusive
Secure
• Are we implementing accessibility and inclusive design
• Are we collaborating with policymakers to create
as requirements/pillars of educational programs related
representative, publicly-available datasets to
to UX/UI design, computer science and data science?
ensure inclusion of persons with disabilities when
• Are we raising awareness among early career researchers
training algorithms?
and developers of the growing impact of AI on inclusion
• Are we emphasizing the importance of metadata to
and that this is a feasible career path?
help stakeholders understand the context of data used
• Are we actively involved in communities and/or research
to train algorithms?
delving into the topic of AI fairness with the aim of
• Are we fostering standardization efforts with regards to
ensuring that disability is included?
bias analysis?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
28 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar As a regulator
or policymaker...
Regulators and policymakers-especially
Responsible
Accessible
those working alongside colleagues with
• Are we strongly encouraging the funding of AI research
• Are we providing accessibility standards for the
disabilities, stakeholders and/or disability
and employing regulation that recognizes the way people
development of AI systems as well as for close
organizations-can take significant steps
with disabilities may both benefit from and be harmed
monitoring once systems are in use, to be in line with the
to advance inclusivity by considering
by AI when considering funding, research and regulatory
needs of persons with disabilities?
priorities? In doing so, are we recognizing the intersection
• Are we specifically including persons with disabilities
these questions as comprehensively as
of race and disability and ensuring that nothing done
as a group to be considered when employing AI in our
possible. Ask the following questions,
for the claimed benefit of disability can in any way harm
guidelines and policies?
and follow each one with: "How shall
Black and other people of color, including people with
• Are we working with stakeholders with disabilities and
disabilities in these groups?
we do this?" or "How can we better our
regulators/policymakers and organizations with expertise
• Are we adapting existing regulations and frameworks
in technology bias against persons with disabilities to
efforts here?" Each answer will bring your
to include AI-powered technologies, with an
understand the needs of various kinds of disabilities, to
action plan into clearer focus.
eye to populations at risk/international human
ensure that we set the right standards of accessibility
rights conventions?
for as many people as possible? How are we verifying/
• Are we emphasizing that AI developers and users are
pressure-testing these standards?
bound by existing anti-discrimination legislation and
responsible for the outcomes and consequences of their
AI-enabled tools?
• Are we including a disability lens when considering
regulations and funding designed for AI ethical principles
such as privacy, security, and autonomy?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

29 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar As a regulator
or policymaker...
Inclusive
Secure
• Are we leveraging existing non-discrimination legislation
• Are we specifically pushing for data protection for AI
to support fairness in AI? And are we considering the need
systems in high-risk areas (e.g., healthcare)?
for additional legislation-doing so in collaboration with
• Are we defining and enforcing quality requirements for
affected communities and their representatives?
data used to train AI systems?
• Are we defining fairness, particularly for AI systems that
• Are we funding, creating and/or providing access to
are at risk of discriminating between people with diverse
representative datasets that consider persons with
backgrounds and experiences (e.g., in hiring)?
disabilities to train AI systems?
• Are we encouraging the use of standardized bias analysis?
• Are we providing means for communication that are
• Are we encouraging the use of validation datasets to test
easily accessible to help persons with disabilities take
for disparate impact on persons with disabilities?
part in AI public participation initiatives?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
30 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar As an investor...
Investors set and sustain critical trends.
Responsible
Accessible
To help do so in the interests of equity,
• Are we emphasizing in our communication with investee
• Are we funding organizations with the potential to
corporate social responsibility (CSR),
organizations the importance of responsible, inclusive
ethically expand the capabilities of AI in promoting
and heightened business performance,
innovation for persons with disabilities that remove
accessibility and inclusion in a manner desired by the
ask the following questions and and
barriers and enhance accessibility?
disability community?
• Are we regularly engaging with our portfolio
• Are we investing in an AI ecosystem that appreciates
follow each one with: "How shall we do
organizations to address potential opportunities to
the value of accessibility and leverages inclusive
this?" or "How can we better our efforts
advance disability inclusion (e.g., through the use of
design principles?
here?" Each answer will bring your
ethical AI and other advanced technologies)?
• Have we sought and listened to input from respected
action plan into clearer focus.
• Are we calling upon our investees to provide accessible
disability organizations, disabled advocates, and others in
re-skilling opportunities where there is potential for job
determining whether organizations seeking funding meet
displacement as a result of AI technology, including
real needs in an ethical way?34
employees with disabilities?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

31 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar As an investor...
Inclusive
Secure
• Have we proposed tying executive compensation to
• Are we proposing to tie executive compensation to
inclusive design, where applicable?
security issues that may arise from misuse of data and/
• Are we incorporating disability inclusion and equality
or result in discrimination against areas of diversity,
into our investment decisions, including relevance to
including disability?
any AI platforms and solutions and are we practicing
• Are we actively communicating expectations on security
rigorous due diligence (including listening to people
measures related to AI-powered technology?
with disabilities) when evaluating products or tools
claiming to be inclusive?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
32 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar As a developer
of AI...
AI developers are at the core of
Responsible
Accessible
organizations' abilities to tap these
• Are we developing AI-powered systems and algorithms
• Have we appointed a person on our team who will
technologies to include applicants and
with datasets that include persons with disabilities,
monitor accessibility of features and functions in
workers with disabilities, help them
recognize disability as a cross-cutting issue impacting
our tools?
thrive at work, and reap the performance
race and gender, and avoid discrimination?
• Are we designing with the end-user in mind, considering
• Are we investing considerable effort upfront to avoid and
the dynamic nature of disability?
benefits of doing so. Real progress starts
eliminate potential sources of bias?
• Are we continuously engaging with persons with
here. Ask the following questions, and
• Are we providing user-facing, easy-to-comprehend
disabilities, grasping the various needs of different kinds
follow each one with: "How shall we do
information for stakeholders to understand the collection
of disabilities to make sure our accessibility efforts are
this?" or "How can we better our efforts
and processing of data?
relevant to as many people as possible?
here?" Each answer will bring your action
• Are we leveraging the expertise of NGOs such as We
• Are we verifying that AI-powered solutions work with the
Count,35 Center for Democracy and Technology, 36 and assistive tech that users with disabilities rely on?
plan into clearer focus.
others that are focused on algorithmic fairness, generally,
and on disability inclusion in AI, specifically?
• Are we providing information on a system's capabilities
and limitations as it pertains to the needs of persons with
disabilities (such as by including persons with disabilities
who are people of color, LGBT, etc.)?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology

33 | Chapter 4: Academics, regulators/policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar As a developer
of AI...
Inclusive
Secure
• Are we ensuring that our AI-based tools follow inclusive
• Are we developing AI systems in alignment with existing
design principles that include the lived experiences of
laws and regulations protecting the rights of persons
persons with disabilities?
with disabilities?
• Do we have feedback loops in place that leverage insights
• Are we taking all available measures to prevent the
gained from AI systems in use to improve bias analysis?
malicious gaming of AI-based tools and systems at the
• Are we using a methodology to measure fairness? Are
hands of bad actors?
we following methodologies from established/credible
• Are we engaging regularly with all relevant internal and
authorities in this space?
external stakeholders to ensure the privacy, security, and
• Are we proactively identifying and remedying any
autonomy rights of persons with disabilities, keeping
potential bias introduced by the development team itself?
in mind, specifically and especially, the sensitivities
• Are we evaluating our AI-based tools using validation
regarding data?
datasets that test for possible disparate impact on
persons with disabilities?
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology









34
Co-Authors
Laurie Henneborn is an Accenture
Ray Eitel-Porter is a Managing Director
Research Managing Director who
at Accenture and Global Lead for
leads research and thought leadership
Responsible AI. He Ied the formation of the
development focused on raising
Accenture / Alan Turing Institute Strategic
awareness and taking actions pertaining
Partnership to create a channel for cutting-
to disability inclusion and equality in the
edge research in data science and AI
workplace. Some of her past works in this
into real-world applications and has 20+
space have included Getting to Equal:
years of experience in technology start-
Laurie
Ray Eitel-Porter
Disability Inclusion Advantage and Getting
ups and corporate leadership positions.
A. Henneborn
to Equal: Enabling Change. She is also Ray is also an editorial board member of
on the board of directors for AAPD and
the academic journal AI and Ethics. He
sits on the Disability Inclusion Leadership
cares deeply about encouraging greater
Council at Accenture. Laurie is especially
innovation with data and analytics in
passionate about coaching and mentoring
business, schools, and further education
colleagues with "invisible" disabilities and
and has chaired the English government's
chronic diseases, drawing from her own
Data Skills Taskforce since 2015 and
experience since being diagnosed with
worked with TeenTech to create the first
multiple sclerosis in 2004.
National Data Science Prize for schools.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology







35
Special acknowledgements to the following people who
contributed their expertise to this project:
DISABILITY:IN
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
OTHER
OF PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES (AAPD)
Jill Houghton,
Maria Town,
Adam Forman,
CEO
President & CEO
Workplace Technology & Labor &
Employment Law Attorney, Epstein,
Chad Jerdee,
Ted Kennedy, Jr.,
Becker, Green
Chair of the Board
Chair of the Board
(former Senior Managing Director
Nathaniel Glasser,
Henry Claypool,
& Executive Sponsor for Disability
Employment Partner,
Technology Policy Consultant
Inclusion initiatives at Accenture)
Epstein, Becker, Green
Lainey Feingold,
Alexandra Reeve Givens, President
Accessibility Subject Matter Expert
& CEO,
Center for Democracy &
Technology
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology







36
Additional Accenture contributors
Lisa Bartolini
Patrick Connolly
Sytze Dijkstra
Michelle Keating
Emily Kish
Amanda Leacy
Tom Lounibos
Regina Maruca
Giju Mathew
Deeksha Khare Patnaik
Vani Seshadri
Melissa Summers
Jim Wilson
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
37
Methodology
The principles and stakeholder
Center for Democracy and Technology, Civil Rights
Intelligence Applications, Jan. 2020.
considerations included in this report
Principles on the Use of AI in Hiring.
Machine Learning for the Web.
have been developed through extensive
Daugherty, Paul R; Wilson, H. James. Human +
Microsoft, AI for Accessibility - Microsoft AI.
interviews and review of existing AI
Machine: Reimagining Work in the Age of AI, Harvard principles published globally. Here are
Business Review Press, 2018.
NAP, Artificial Intelligence Applications for Older
some of our key sources:
Adults and People with Disabilities: Balancing Safety
Fjeld, Jessica and Achten, Nele and Hilligoss, Hannah
and Autonomy, May 2019
and Nagy, Adam and Srikumar, Madhulika, Principled
Accenture, Driving the accessibility advantage
Artificial Intelligence: Mapping Consensus in Ethical
Slate, How Algorithmic Bias Hurts People
at Accenture.
and Rights-Based Approaches to Principles for AI
With Disabilities.
Accenture Federal Services, Responsible AI: A
(January 15, 2020). Berkman Klein Center Research
UNPRI, What are the Principles for Responsible
Framework for Building Trust in Your AI Solutions.
Publication No. 2020-1, Available at SSRN.
Investment?
Accenture, Human AI is Here.
Harvard Business Review, Neurodiversity as a
We Count, About.
Competitive Advantage.
AI Now Institute, Disability, Bias, and AI.
Health Law Advisor, U.S. Advances AI Innovation
American Bar Association, Epstein, Becker & Green,
with NAIIA.
P.C., Hacking Recruitment: Workforce Optimization in
the Digital Age.
IBM, Precision Regulation for Artificial Intelligence.
Center for Democracy and Technology, Algorithm-
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Draft
driven Hiring Tools: Innovative Recruitment or
Memorandum to the Heads of Executive Departments
Expedited Disability Discrimination?
and Agencies, Guidance for Regulation of Artificial
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology







38
About Accenture
About Accenture Research
Accenture is a global professional services company
Accenture Research shapes trends and creates
with leading capabilities in digital, cloud and
data-driven insights about the most pressing issues
security. Combining unmatched experience and
global organizations face. Combining the power
specialized skills across more than 40 industries,
of innovative research techniques with a deep
we offer Strategy and Consulting, Interactive,
understanding of our clients' industries, our team
Technology and Operations services-all powered by
of 300 researchers and analysts spans 20 countries
the world's largest network of Advanced Technology
and publishes hundreds of reports, articles and
and Intelligent Operations centers. Our more
points of view every year. Our thought-provoking
than 500,000 people deliver on the promise of
research-supported by proprietary data and
technology and human ingenuity every day, serving
partnerships with leading organizations, such as MIT
clients in more than 120 countries. We embrace the
and Harvard-guides our innovations and allows us
power of change to create value and shared success
to transform theories and fresh ideas into real-world
for our clients, people, shareholders, partners and
solutions for our clients. For more information,
communities. Visit us at www.accenture.com.
visit www.accenture.com/research
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology
39
Sources
1. Please note that this report will use identity-first and people-13. Brookings, For some employment algorithms, disability
Based Approaches to Principles for AI (January 15, 2020).
first language interchangeably due to the diversity in
discrimination by default.
Berkman Klein Center Research Publication No. 2020-1,
perspectives in the disability community on the topic.
14. Harvard University, Racial Discrimination in Face
Available at SSRN.
2. Jerdee, Chad, "What organizations gain by including persons
Recognition Technology.
28. Accenture, What is Explainable AI (XAI)? This is defined as
with disabilities, " World Economic Forum, April 23, 2019 3
15. Accenture, AI ethics & governance.
systems with the ability to explain their rationale for decisions, Accenture, Disability:IN, AAPD. Getting to Equal: The Disability
16. Accenture, Tackling the challenge of ethics in AI.
characterize the strengths and weaknesses of their decision-
Inclusion Advantage.
making process, and convey an understanding of how they will
17. Center for Democracy and Technology,
3. Accenture has rich experience and thought leadership in the behave in the future.
Algorithm-driven Hiring Tools: Innovative Recruitment or
areas of Responsible AI, inclusion and diversity. Includes, but
Expedited Disability Discrimination?
29. Ad Law Access, Employers Beware: The Illinois Artificial
not limited to sources referenced in Methodology section.
Intelligence Video Interview Act Is Now in Effect.
18. SHRM, Employers Embrace Artificial Intelligence for HR.
4. The core R(AI)S principles were developed through a
30. Becoming Human, Tackling ethics in AI algorithms:
partnership of Accenture, the American Association of People
19. Suggested reading: Slate, How Algorithmic Bias Hurts People
the case of Salesforce.
with Disabilities (AAPD) and Disability:IN to help employers
With Disabilities. (CDT Opt-Ed) 31. American Bar Association, Epstein, Becker & Green, P.C., ensure that AI supports persons with disabilities in the
20. AI Now Institute, Disability, Bias, and AI.
Hacking Recruitment: Workforce Optimization in the Digital
workplace and does not inadvertently limit or discriminate
21. Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requires
Age. Content contains a helpful checklist starting on page 27.
against any applicants or employees.
employers to provide reasonable accommodation to qualified
32. Microsoft, Our Approach: Putting Principles into Practice.
5. Accenture, 2019 Global Risk Management Study.
individuals with disabilities who are employees or applicants
33. Telefónica, AI Principles of Telefónica.
6. European Commission, Regulatory framework on AI | Shaping
for employment, unless doing so would cause undue hardship
34. Overlay Factsheet. Addresses the issue of "overlay" vendors/
Europe's digital future
to the organization.
solutions which may not be fully compliant and ethical.
7. Accenture, AI: Built to Scale.
22. BlindSquare, What is BlindSquare?
35. We Count, About.
8. Accenture, Getting to Equal: Enabling Change Global Survey.
23. Human Resource Executive, Training in a Virtual World:
The New Normal.
36. Center for Democracy and Technology, About.
9. Accenture, Accenture Technology Vision 2020: From
Tech-Clash to Trust, the Focus Must Be on People |
24. 3PlayMedia, VR Lawsuit Filed Due to Lack of Captions.
Accenture Newsroom.
25. PEAT Works, Extended Reality (XR).
10. Microsoft, Inclusive Design.
26. XR Access, Resources.
11. Accenture, Amplify You: How Technology Can Help Bridge The
27. Fjeld, Jessica and Achten, Nele and Hilligoss, Hannah and
Digital Divide For People With Disabilities.
Nagy, Adam and Srikumar, Madhulika, Principled Artificial
12. EEOC, Fiscal Year 2019 Annual Performance Report.
Intelligence: Mapping Consensus in Ethical and Rights-
This content is provided for general information purposes and is not intended to be used in place of consultation with our professional advisors.
AI for disability inclusion | Enabling change with advanced technology Copyright (c) 2021 Accenture. All rights reserved.
Accenture and its logo are registered trademarks of Accenture.
Document Outline
* AI for disability inclusion: Enabling change with advanced technology
o Table of contents
o Expand executive awareness of the power of AI to foster disability inclusion Chapter 1
* What is "inclusive design"?
o Focus on the benefits; screen for and eliminate potential for unintended consequences Chapter 2
* The hiring process
* Life at work
* Employee evaluations
o R(AI)S your AI game with guiding principles Chapter 3
* Responsible
* Accessible
* Inclusive
* Secure
* AI: A worthy match for barriers to inclusion
o Academics, regulators/ policymakers, investors, and developers can also R(AI)S the bar Chapter 4
* As a member of academia....
* As a regulator or policymaker...
* As an investor...
* As a developer of AI...
o Co-Authors
* Special acknowledgements to the following people who contributed their expertise to this project:
* Additional Accenture contributors
o Methodology
o About Accenture
o About Accenture Research
o Sources
