
Table of Contents
What is Generative Artificial 
Intelligence (AI)?	1
Why talk about AI now?	3
What are the Equity Implications of Generative AI in K-12 Classrooms?	4
How do student data privacy policies impact the use of AI in K-12 classrooms?	6

What is the potential of generative AI in K-12 
Generative Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) in K-12 
Classrooms
What is Generative Artificial 
Intelligence (AI)?
Broadly speaking, artificial intelligence (AI) is defined as "the science and engineering of making intelligent machines, especially intelligent computer programs. It is related to the similar task of using computers to understand human intelligence, but AI does not have to confine itself to methods that are biologically observable."1 Many types of artificial intelligence have been defined, which have led to a large number of applications of AI including self-driving vehicles, automatic language translation, facial recognition, virtual assistants (like Siri or Alexa), recommendation systems used in streaming platforms like Netflix, and of course chatbots like ChatGPT and Bard.

What might districts consider when developing policy related 
to generative AI? ........................ 10
When considering these foundational AI technologies that make tools like ChatGPT and Bard possible, it is important to keep the following in mind:
▪	These tools are designed to act like or simulate what most would consider intelligent behavior, such as responding to questions in a human-like manner. They are not artificial brains or sentient life forms with human characteristics like free will, self-awareness, and emotions.
▪	These tools are trained on vast amounts of data, much of which comes from the Internet. As such they are subject to biases and inaccuracies that are inherent in the information found on the Internet. Caution must be exercised when considering a response from a generative AI system.
KEY TERMINOLOGY
Generative AI: Generative AI systems fall under the broad category of machine learning with GPT being one example.
GPT: Generative Pre-trained Transformers are an example of generative AI. GPT models are trained using large data sets to generate text. Examples of GPT AI include: Bard, ChatGPT, and Microsoft's Digital Assistant Co-Pilot.
Large Language Model AI: Large Language Model AI: This model is trained using an extensive amount of data in order to produce human-like responses.1
It is also important to note that various forms of AI have been integrated into classrooms and our everyday lives for decades. For example, instructional resources and assessments that use algorithmic or adaptive learning, automatic translation tools such as Google translate or Babelfish (which was an early translation tool), and programs such as Grammarly that support writing are all examples of AI. The Office of Educational Technology published a report titled "Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Teaching and Learning" that provides additional examples regarding the history of AI and the importance of proactively addressing the growth of AI in our schools and classrooms. Importantly, this report puts an emphasis on developing people rather than machine-centered policies by keeping humans in the loop when using AI. They use the following metaphor to describe its use noting that "teachers, learners, and others need to retain their agency to decide what patterns mean and to choose courses of action."
We envision a technology-enhanced future more like an electric bike and less like robot vacuums. On an electric bike, the human is fully aware and fully in control, but their burden is less, and their effort is multiplied by a complementary technological enhancement. Robot vacuums do their job, freeing the human from involvement or oversight.
This resource developed by ODE as well as any future resources align with this metaphor in that whenever using AI (or any educational technology in the classroom) it is essential that educators are the decision makers and their knowledge and expertise is central. 
Why talk about AI now?
The use of AI in education, while not a new phenomenon, has gained traction recently given the introduction of generative AI that uses large language models such as ChatGPT, Bard, and Co-Pilot. Such models have the potential to transform the way that technology is used by educators, students, and families alike. Given this influx, it is vital that schools and districts plan proactively in developing policies related to the use of AI in classrooms so as to ensure that policies are clear, attentive to the current moment, mindful of student data privacy and equity centered. 
Whenever new technologies are introduced, there is a potential for both innovation and risks when considering the impact on instructional practices and student learning experiences and outcomes. Generative AI are just the newest examples of these emerging technologies, with previous generations experiencing advances in technology such as the internet, graphing calculators, smart phones, etc. While generative AI has the potential to support access to learning in classrooms for all students, these technologies can exacerbate inequities for students from marginalized student groups in the absence of thoughtful policy, practice, and educator support and training. 
Given the influx of AI in education, several organizations have come together to provide guidance on the use of AI in education in addition to resources for teaching about AI. Examples include:
▪	The CRAFT (Classroom-Ready Resources About AI For Teaching Project), developed by Stanford University's Graduate School of Education has resources to support high school teachers in supporting students' AI literacy.
▪	Teach AI, a partnership between major education organizations, including Code.Org, ISTE, the World Economic Forum, National Association of State Boards of Education, National School Boards Association, Educational Testing Service, Khan Academy, and ISTE was developed in an effort to to provide guidance to policy-makers and educational leaders around AI in education.
The Hands-On AI Projects for the Classroom from ISTE and GM has developed guides for elementary and secondary teachers to support student-driven learning related to AI and its impacts on society.

What are the Equity Implications of Generative AI in K-12 Classrooms?
When developing policy around the use of generative AI in K-12 classrooms, it is important to take into consideration the fact that generative AI is a component of a larger digital learning ecosystem. While digital learning and education technology has the potential to address inequities when implemented with an equity focus and mindset, in the absence of this intention, digital learning and education technology can also exacerbate existing inequities and make schooling more difficult for those who are already marginalized within the system. 
Equity implications to keep front and center when designing policy specific to generative AI in K-12 classrooms includes bias, innaccuracy, plagiarism, copyright/licensing unknowns, and equity of access. Table 1 provides examples of strategies to address these equity implications.
▪	Bias: As generative AI uses algorithms created by human designers, there is a strong potential for the introduction of bias into the system. Some examples include privileging certain language variations, showing racial and gender biases, having a United States-centric lens, and providing only a limited perspective. As generative AI uses large data sets, historical and systemic biases are introduced into the system. Further, as generative AI lacks cultural knowledge and experience, this can lead to misinterpretations of prompts given and answers that privilege a certain cultural perspective.
▪	Inaccuracy: As generative AI draws from large data sets, it is not guaranteed to be accurate as not all information on the internet is accurate. AI is only as good as the data that is fed into the machine learning algorithms. Additionally, generative AI is not necessarily coded to provide accurate information, rather it simply predicts the type of information needed to best fit a given Prompt. For example, when asking ChatGPT for sources to support information provided, there are times in which the sources are fabricated. This is known as "AI hallucinations."2
▪	Plagiarism: A common concern from educators is that generative AI and other AI technologies will be used by students to write essays and complete assignments. As generative AI does provide written responses to prompts, this concern has led a number of districts across the nation toward banning the platform due to a concern for cheating and plagiarism.
▪	Copyright/ Licensing Unknowns: Understanding copyright laws is an important element of using generative AI and other AI technology in the classroom, in that as this is new technology, there are not clear boundaries regarding who owns the content generated by AI. As companies continue to develop licenses on their products, it is important for educators to reflect on the implications of copyright/licensing unknowns.
▪	Equity of Access: Access to generative AI and lack thereof can have broad and deep equity impacts on students - both while in K-12 education and for college and career readiness.
Given the inherent equity impacts of introducing generative AI into the digital learning ecosystem, educating students, families, and educators (including paraeducators, secretaries, support staff, etc.) on these equity implications can help to move toward using generative AI in ways that are culturally responsive and sustaining for students, families, and communities. Additionally, when developing policy, it is important that creating and cultivating a digital learning ecosystem wherein equity is at the heart of the decision making process is key to ensuring that the learning experiences that students engage in honor their sociocultural identity and lived experience. 
Table 1. Potential Strategies to Address Equity Impacts of the use of 
Generative AI in K-12 Classrooms
Equity ImpactStrategies to Address Equity ImpactBias ▪Ensure that all educators are trained to understand the potential for bias in AI. This can include training modules, PLC focused topics, book studies, etc.▪Talk with students about the potential biases of AI in addition to teaching strong research and digital literacy skills to ensure that if generative AI is used, it is done so with an understanding that it is a first step rather than a final step with the most importance being placed on the human user in verifying the information presented.▪Provide resources for families so that they understand the potential bias within ChatGPT and other AI technologies. Common Sense Media has a Guide to ChatGPT for Parents and Caregivers that is a great place to start.Inaccuracy▪Provide training to educators, students, and families (e.g. digital literacy) to support in deepening skills in lateral reading and fact checking for misinformation, disinformation, and malinformation within generative AI responses.▪If using generative AI in the classroom, ask students to find other sources that support the information provided by generative AI in order to check for accuracy. Consider using resources such as Stanford History Education's Civic Online Reasoning curriculum, National Council for Social Studies (NCSS) Evaluating Sources and Using Evidence resources, and books such as Developing Digital Detectives: Essential Lessons for Discerning Fact from Fiction in the Fake News Era by Jennifer LaGarde and Darren Hudgins.Plagiarism3▪Rethink assignments and be clear on what standards/skills are being addressed.▪Create more opportunities for students to problem solve, analyze and synthesize and share their thinking in classroom settings.▪Embed formative assessment throughout in order to get a deeper sense of students' writing over time.▪Train educators to detect the presence of AI written communication such as repetitive sentences, overly complicated vocabulary, and predictable writing structure.▪Consider using AI detectors - with an understanding that these detectors often incorrectly detect the use of AI particularly when students use formal academic language. There are several resources that educators can use to determine whether or not students are using generative AI including Turnitin AI detector and GPT Zero. Both of these programs have mixed results with regards to detecting AI.
However, as the AI technology continues to progress, so too will these evaluation resources.▪Develop strong policies that include when and how generative AI can be used in the classroom. Be sure to discuss the potential risks of using AI with students (e.g. inaccurate information, bias, etc.) and provide students with digital literacy and citizenship so that they understand these risks.▪Support students in sharing their writing process e.g. discussing how and where they got their information and their strategy for integrating it into their drafts. Creating discussion opportunities in addition to having students turn in drafts of their writing along the way in order to show that the process is equally as valuable as the product can be helpful in creating strong writers and researchers.▪Consider how to teach and support students in developing digital and information literacy skills. For example, the International Baccalaureate (IB) has determined that rather than banning software, they will support schools in using software to "...support their students on how to use these tools ethically in line with our principles of academic integrity.4"Equity ImpactStrategies to Address Equity ImpactCopyright/ 
Licensing 
Unknowns▪
▪Review licensing types on Creative Commons and discuss copyright and licensing information with staff.
Review the Copyright Office's New Artificial Intelligence Initiative - while not specific to education, as educators often use, curate, and share instructional materials through digital means, understanding copyright laws and how they impact the use of information developed through AI will be important.Equity of Access▪Consider the equity impacts of certain students having access and others not having access in addition to not all educators having the training needed to support students in the use of this technology - for example, generative AI can be particularly impactful for students with disabilities and multilingual learners and not using them has the potential to limit students' access to learning opportunities (see below for information regarding the use of ChatGPT and UDL - Universal Design for Learning).▪Talk to students, educators, families, community members, and industry professionals to better understand the potential uses of generative AI and how generative AI might be used as a skill set for future employment.▪Be attentive to the cost of the platforms such as ChatGPT. While platforms such as ChatGPT are currently available at no cost, this might not be the case in the future as it is not uncommon for technology companies to create a paywall after initial success and website traffic. This has the potential to create equity implications for students and families who are unable to afford the associated cost of the platform.56How do student data privacy policies impact the use of AI in K-12 classrooms?
There are several federal and state policies associated with student data privacy that are important to be aware of when setting policy for the use of AI technologies in schools including Family Educational Rights & Privacy Act (FERPA), the Children's Internet Privacy Act (CIPA), the Children's Online Privacy and Protection Act (COPPA) and the Oregon Student Information Protection Act (OSIPA). COPPA, in particular, impacts technology users under the age of 13 in that companies are not allowed to collect personal information from children under the age of 13 without parental consent, while OSIPA lays out certain requirements that must be met when using digital platforms of any kind including the following:
▪	Disclosing any covered information provided by the operator to subsequent third parties, except in furtherance of kindergarten through grade 12 school purposes of the site.
▪	Engaging in targeted advertising on the operator's site, service or application. ▪	Selling a student's information, including covered information.
PERSONAL INFORMATION AND GENERATIVE AI
Users should be cautious when entering personal information into any technology application. This is a particularly important consideration when using generative AI applications such as ChatGPT as the information entered by users (including prompts and questions posed) is stored on the application's server and integrated into the large language model used to respond to user prompts.
When developing district policies, it is essential to ensure that they are not in violation of COPPA or OSIPA. All schools and districts engaging with AI technologies (or any technology broadly) should regularly review the company's usage and privacy policies to ensure that they are not in violation of COPPA or OSIPA.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND RESOURCES FOR STUDENT DATA PRIVACY IMPLICATIONS
Whenever new technology is introduced, reviewing the data use and privacy policies are of key importance. For example, for the purposes of ChatGPT, a starting place is to read the privacy policy of OpenAI, the developer of ChatGPT. The privacy policy includes specific information related to the use of ChatGPT for children:
"Our Service is not directed to children who are under the age of 13. OpenAI does not knowingly collect Personal Information from children under the age of 13. If you have reason to believe that a child under the age of 13 has provided Personal Information to OpenAI through the Service please 
email us at legal@openai.com. We will investigate any notification and if appropriate, delete the 
Personal Information from our systems."
Schools and districts are also encouraged to look over OpenAI's Educator Considerations for ChatGPT for additional information.
What is the potential of generative AI in K-12 classrooms?7 
Generative AI can be leveraged for use in education in a variety of ways including providing support with designing learning experiences for students, as a teaching tool, as a support for differentiation, as a "partner" in instructional support, as a virtual assistant, and as a starting point for providing student support and guidance. See Table 2 below for additional context and ideas. As this technology is expanding at rapid speed, it is likely that its uses in education will continue to expand, thus providing additional ways in which to create equitable learning opportunities for students if done so in tandem with strong and intentional policy development. 
AI is part of the larger educational technology ecosystem and thus should be implemented alongside strong policy and educator training. Generative AI alone will not transform educational opportunities for students. Instead, using AI within an educational technology ecosystem that centers relationships and mental health, pedagogy and practice, and highquality instructional materials creates opportunities for more equitable and culturally responsive learning opportunities for students - opportunities that lead to student learning and belonging.
RESOURCES TO SUPPORT THE USE OF GENERATIVE AI IN K-12 CLASSROOMS
Resources for the Educational Use of Generative AI in K-12 Classrooms: This document developed by ODE highlights potential resources for school and district leaders and educators to use to support deeper understandings of AI in schools. The document is broken down by categories so that educators 
can find resources that match their needs. Given that the field of AI is changing so rapidly, this document will be updated to reflect new resources that center the equitable use of AI in schools. If you have particular resources that you would like to see included on this document, please email ODE.DigitalLearning@ode.oregon.gov. Although generative AI is still in its infancy, educators across the world have found the use of this tool to create increased learning opportunities for their students. Some learning opportunities include:
▪	Learning Design: Generative AI can support teachers in developing lesson plans to support student learning in addition to lessening the burden of creating individualized instructional materials for students. While it is important that generative AI is seen as a starting point for this work, with the teacher being the most important part of lesson and materials development, generative AI can support teachers in the beginning stages of the development. Generative AI can support students with disabilities as it can streamline content and therefore scaffold learning materials.8
▪	Teaching Tool: Generative AI can be used as a teaching tool in the classroom. When teachers have explicit policies about when it is appropriate to use generative AI, and students have been taught digital literacy skills to understand how to couple the information provided by generative AI with lateral reading skills, it can serve as a teaching tool.
▪	Instructional Support: Generative AI can be used by teachers to efficiently find instructional resources on the basis of specific topic areas as well as pedagogical approaches to provide individualized instruction. This includes using a program like ChatGPT to differentiate instructional resources by student grade level.
▪	Virtual Assistant: Generative AI can serve as a virtual research assistant for educators to support everyday tasks. This use of generative AI can create additional time for teachers to spend on building relationships with their students, engaging in direct and small group instruction, and providing feedback on assignments.
▪	Student Support and Guidance: Generative AI has the potential to support students with developing research skills, learning to ask strong questions, and providing advice regarding college and career planning.
▪	Future Career Options: Generative AI and the use of AI is likely to be central to future careers - both in terms of understanding the ways in which AI functions (computer science) and using AI to communicate and engage in work functions (digital literacy). Therefore, supporting students in learning about AI and using it responsibly, ethically, and productively will support them far beyond their K-12 education.
While generative AI provides valuable educational opportunities, it is merely a starting point. Teachers are the most essential part of the teaching and learning process. Generative AI and any other AI or technology does not, and cannot, replace a teacher or a counselor. Generative AI is an emerging tool with no critical thinking abilities - it cannot discern whether the information it provides is generated in a way that is responsive to the needs and context of the students. However, it can be used as a teaching and learning tool. Therefore, when developing training to support policy related to the use of AI technologies, ensuring that teachers are trained in its uses (and limitations) as well as lifted up as the experts will be of utmost importance.
USING AI TO REACH ALL LEARNERS 
With intentional use and teacher guidance, AI can also be a great aid to students receiving special education and language services.  For example, AI can provide visual descriptions of objects and scenes for students with visual impairments and can help them in visualizing content.  Text to speech features and speech to text features can also make accessing and contributing to classroom content more fluid and immediate.  Multilingual learners can benefit through language conversations with AI in order to practice speaking and writing skills.  Asking questions and receiving immediate feedback allows for language development and can introduce new words, idiomatic expressions, and varied vocabulary. Given student data privacy laws, however, it is important that districts confirm that their policy around student use of AI conforms to student data privacy rules - student privacy and safety should be emphasized first and foremost in any policy decisions.
Table 2. Potential Instructional Strategies for the use of Generative AI in K-12 classrooms
OpportunityExample(s)Learning Design▪Teachers can lean on Generative AI to develop assessment questions based on content - based on the prompt, teachers can ask for specific question types e.g. written response, multiple choice, higher order thinking, etc.▪Teachers can use Generative AI to support and expand their own learning about the content they are teaching.▪Generative AI can generate lessons, activities, and assessments that follow UDL (Universal Design for Learning) guidelines.▪Generative AI can provide steps in how to integrate culturally specific content into lesson planning.Instructional Support▪Teachers can modify a response provided by generative AI to provide more specificity e.g. rewrite using a project-based learning activity, rewrite the lesson with a focus on vocabulary development.▪Teachers can provide a rubric and include student writing samples and ask generative AI to evaluate student work.▪Generative AI responses can be generated in a variety of languages allowing multilingual learners access to translated materials that may not be embedded within the school's instructional materials.▪When asking generative AI a question, the user can request the response to be provided at a particular grade level or reading level. Furthermore, the user can request that responses contain specific vocabulary and sentence complexity.▪Teachers can use generative AI tools to support writing instruction. For example, ChatGPT and other AI platforms can be used to develop outlines for student writing to provide scaffolds for students.Virtual Assistant▪Generative AI can help with developing drafts of emails and other communications, finding supplementary content aligned with their curriculum, and searching the web for continuing education courses aligned with their interests and needs.Student Support and Guidance▪Students can practice writing research questions and use generative AI responses as a determination of the strength of their questions.▪Students who have difficulty with writing can use generative AI to write an initial draft of an essay and use it as a "rough draft" with the next step being to revise to make it unique.▪Students can ask generative AI which colleges or universities offer particular programs of interest or what education or experience is required for certain career pathways.▪Students can use generative AI to better understand the revision process by asking ChatGPT to revise a particular section and then analyzing the methods used to accomplish the requested revision.Future Career Options▪Show students examples of the ways that AI is being used in spaces outside of education e.g. the medical industry, the automobile industry, and the manufacturing industry.▪Consider integrating instruction about AI into the curriculum. For example, AI4All has an openly licensed curriculum "Bytes of AI" available on Oregon Open Learning that can be integrated into high school courses.▪Ensure that students understand how to use AI responsibly, ethically, and productively by integrating digital citizenship lessons into the curriculum. For example, Common Sense Media has openly licensed digital citizenship lessons that can provide a starting point for integration across K-12.What might districts consider when developing policy related to generative AI?
With the influx of generative AI platforms entering the education sphere, it is important that schools and districts are taking into consideration the equity impacts of such technologies alongside the potential for student learning that generative AI can have when implemented with equity at its core. What is equally important is for schools and districts to reflect on the larger digital learning ecosystem in order to ensure that generative AI platforms, if used, are done so in culturally responsive and sustaining ways and supported by strong professional development for teachers, transparent communication with families and the larger school community, and education for students. This resource is designed to support schools and districts in developing policy and protocols related to introducing generative AI into the larger digital learning ecosystem. For some schools and districts, this might require creating new policy, for others this might require shifting current policy, and for others it might look like developing protocols for use as aligned with current technology policy and cyber plans.
Starting Points for Reflection and Development of Policies and Protocols 
As schools and districts begin or continue discussions related to policy development around the use of AI technologies in classrooms, it is important to acknowledge the prevalence of AI being used outside of the education system. For example, computer programmers are already using it to write code, Human Resources departments are using it to write job descriptions, companies like Microsoft and Salesforce are using it to write emails and perform administrative tasks, and the use of AI is continuing to change the medical field. Additionally, there are examples of AI technologies being used for language revitalization within Indigenous communities.11 Therefore, while there are concerns to be aware of with regard to the use of AI within school it will be a tool that many will use throughout their lives.

Additional guidance developed by ODE speaks specifically about equity within educational technology and can be referenced as districts and schools navigate AI and its role in education including The Key Components of Digital Learning and Online and Remote Learning Guidance.
The Key Components of Digital Learning provides a starting point for design, dialogue, and implementation of equity-centered technology integration by offering five Key Components including: relationships and mental health, pedagogy and practice, high-quality instructional materials, digital learning capacity and readiness, and funding for digital learning.
The Online and Remote Learning Guidance: Critical Requirements and Design Indicators provides three pillars for online and remote schools and programs to consider within their design process: lead and design for equity, creating relational conditions for learning, and plan and implement inclusive instruction. While this guidance is designed for online and remote schools and programs, the pillars can provide a starting point for all schools in developing policy related to educational technology.
For more information, please contact ODE's Digital Learning Team at ode.onlineremotelearning@ode.oregon.gov. 
1 An Introduction to Large Language Models. Retrieved from: https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2023/03/an-introduction-tolarge-language-models-llms/ 
2 Shripad Shenwai, D. (2023). What is AI Hallucination? What Goes Wrong with AI Chatbots? How to Spot a Hallucinating Artificial Intelligence? Retrieved from: https://www.marktechpost.com/2023/04/02/what-is-ai-hallucination-what-goes-wrong-with-aichatbots-how-to-spot-a-hallucinating-artificial-intelligence/ 
3 Recently, AI art tools that plagiarize artists' original works and styles have become mainstream. Both of these examples create an opportunity to teach students digital literacy skills in association with the use of ChatGPT and other AI technologies in ensuring that they are correctly citing their sources and using lateral reading skills to ensure that information learned from AI is accurate.
4 You can read more about both IB and AP's approach in the article: Statement from the IB about ChatGPT and artificial intelligence in assessment and education
5 Byrd, C. (2023). WRITE Center Helps Teachers Grapple with ChatGPT and Future of Writing Instruction. Retrieved from: https:// education.uci.edu/chatgpt.html 
6 Note that the most powerful version of ChatGPT (v4) does require a paid monthly subscription.
7 This list has been modified from McClennen, N. and Dené Poth , R. (2023). Education is about to radically change: AI for the masses. Retrieved from: https://www.gettingsmart.com/2022/12/16/education-is-about-to-radically-change-ai-for-the-masses/ 
8 AI technologies more broadly provide support for students with disabilities including: image and facial recognition for students with visual impairments, lip-reading recognition for students with a hearing impairment, text summarization and real-time captioning, and AI-powered automatic speech recognition and transcription.
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------





	Oregon Department of Education - Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) in K-12 Classrooms 	2

	Oregon Department of Education - Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) in K-12 Classrooms 	2





