
Using AI in ways that enhance Charter RESEARCH playbook
worker dignity and inclusion
New research and frameworks for leadership
approaches to AI that will benefit workers
Brought to you by:
Table of contents
01 Researcher's note
05 Introduction
10 Consider who gets to disrupt and who will
be disrupted
16 Study participant snapshot
19 Give workers a say in how AI is developed
and deployed
26 Criteria for workers embracing AI
28 Past technological transformations offer
cautions about shared prosperity
31 Frameworks for ensuring that more
workers see benefits from AI
39 How to foster human-centered AI
adoption in your workplace
45 Methodology
53 Acknowledgements
54 Funder and partner information
56 About Charter
58 Reading list
Researcher's note Charter 01
01 Researcher's note
People in under-represented groups are often disenfranchised and devalued during moments of economic and societal transition. Amid the great promise of using generative artificial intelligence (AI)1 in workplaces-and we expect that the nature of most modern jobs will change significantly-we're concerned about the groups of workers who are least likely to benefit. Our research findings suggest that women, workers of color, and those over 55 could be disproportionately disadvantaged by the broader use of AI and automation. But it doesn't have to be that way. 1 We define generative AI here as we described it to survey participants, as techniques "used to generate new content, such as text, images, and audio. Commonly used examples of generative AI include ChatGPT, Bard, and Photoshop Generative Fill."

Researcher's note Charter 02
For this playbook, we set out to understand the attitudes and concerns
that workers and managers have around the adoption of AI in their
workplaces. Data we've collected about who is making use of this
technology, and who stands to benefit from it, are concerning:
+14 percentage points Over half of Black respondents express concern about AI replacing them in their jobs in the next five years (53%), 14 percentage points higher than for white respondents (39%).
+10 percentage points Yet Black workers and managers express more enthusiasm about using generative AI tools at work in the future (61% vs. 51%).
They are also more likely to be using generative AI tools as part of their day-to-day work already (45% vs. 37%).
-13 percentage points Women respondents (35%) are less likely than male respondents (48%) to be using generative AI tools in their jobs currently.
-20 percentage points Women are less likely than men to agree to the statement "I am excited about the prospect of using generative AI as part of my day-to day-work" (46% vs 66%).
Based on our reporting and research with individuals working in
manufacturing, service, and knowledge sectors, these are a few things
we know for sureT
N Employers have license to talk about AI more, even (especially!)
while they are learning about the technologies themselves. We are in a moment of mutual learning: Employees and hourly workers
Researcher's note Charter 03
alike tell us that they expect their employers to offer more AI-focused training that will help them in their jobs. They also want to be involved in planning and decision-making around AI to make these technologies more time-saving and safe.
v The digital divide won't correct itself. Employers have a unique
role to play in helping ensure that workers across roles and
demographic groups are strengthened rather than undermined as
a result of AI in their workplacesZ
v Workers and worker voice have been treated as afterthoughts in
much of the current coverage of generative AI. We notice a
concerning lack of reporting and research on the ways that
workers themselves want to use AI in their roles.
This project is one attempt to address these trends. At Charter, our interest is in distributing research-backed guidance that benefits workers, leaders, and organizations. We see this topic-making new technologies work for more workers-as central to our goal of making workplaces more fair and dynamic.
Our intention is to offer a set of frameworks and considerations that are broadly relevant across industries. You won't find recommendations about which specific AI tools to use, or specific types of jobs that people should approach in alternate ways. Those recommendations are evolving and others bring expertise there, including those featured in the reading list. This particular research highlights workers' and managers' perspectives and approaches for employers to adopt to proceed from here.
We wrote this playbook for:S
v Workers: We hope that this reflects the needs, concerns, and
hopes for workplace AI that they shared with us, and offers
practical guidance to ensure that more workers see meaningful
benefits from AIZ
v HR practitioners: This playbook offers strategic frameworks for
centering workers and managers in AI planning and people
developmentZ
v All leaders: This is designed to help prioritize beneficial worker
outcomes and see around corners regarding investments in AI
tools and training.
Researcher's note Charter 04
Tell us what guidance you seek on making a just transition to AI in your
workplace: research@charterworks.com. We look forward to hearing
from you.
Emily Goligoski
Head of Research
October 2023
New York City
Charter is a future-of-work media and research company. We're
designing new frameworks for work so that people and organizations
thrive. Charter's sophisticated journalism, actionable research, and
advisory services empower leaders to transform their workplaces.
Follow our full coverage and research on AI and work and sign up for
our newsletter.
Introduction Charter 05
02 Introduction
Employers must act with purpose now to ensure greater workforce participation with AI.

Introduction Charter 06
On May 2, 2023, 11,500 film and television writers went on strike. One of
their main areas of concern: generative artificial intelligence. Years ago,
the idea that AI would be a threat to screenwriters would have seemed
far-fetched. There was a long-held assumption among academic
researchers that creative work was safe from automation. The rapid
rise of ChatGPT and other generative AI applications has flipped that
assumption on its head.
A recent study by researchers at OpenAI, OpenResearch, and the
University of Pennsylvania found that about 80% of the US workforce
could see at least 10% of their tasks affected by large language models.
Nearly one in five could see at least half of their tasks affected. How
this plays out in the labor market, overall, depends on how leaders
react. "The critical point is that it depends on what firms do," Harvard
Business School professor Raffaella Sadun recently told the Harvard
Business Review. "There is nothing that is predetermined at this point."
AI could be the most important technology in our lifetimes,
comparable to the internet or even electricity. Like other
transformative technologies, it can be used in ways that help or hurt
workers. There are many possible futures for the technologyC
e It can augment workers, by acting as a copilot, amplifying workers'
skills.1
e It can displace workers, if companies treat it as a cost-cutting
tool.1
e It can change the vast majority of jobs, by automating some tasks
and augmenting others2, creating the need for upskilling and retraining0
e It can perpetuate biases, by making predictions or
recommendations based on incomplete or otherwise problematic
data sets.1
e It can identify and remove biases, by, for example, scanning job
postings and performance reviews and suggesting more inclusive language.
2 Erik Brynjolfsson of the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI (HAI)
distinguishes between the use of AI for automation (replacing human workers)
and augmentation (empowering them).
Introduction Charter 07
O It can decrease economic inequality, by lowering the productivity
gap between high- and low-performing workers and by automating
complex tasks, thereby lowering barriers to entry for some
professions..
O It can increase economic inequality, if companies only value top
performers and AI, treating other labor as an interchangeable
commodity,
O It can displace more well-educated, highly paid workers, if it
primarily impacts tasks performed by them, as several studies
have predicted..
O It can displace more low-educated workers, depending on their
ability to reskill for the changes ahead, says Georgetown professor
of public policy Harry Holzer,
O It can be a coach for employees, providing insights and
recommendations that improve their performance,
O It can manage employees, monitoring their work and providing
recommendations to companies about who to hire, fire, and
promote..
O It can render occupations obsolete, similar to how the automobile
eliminated jobs in horse-related occupations,
O It can create more jobs, by driving down the cost of production,
stimulating demand for goods and services,
O It can create new types of jobs, by enabling new products and
services and creating demand for forms of work that currently
don't exist.
The decisions business leaders make around the technology and its implementation will play a significant role in shaping its future impact on workers. Over the following pages, you'll find frameworks for adopting AI in ways that put workers at the center.
Introduction Charter 08
Summary: How to foster human-centered
AI adoption in your workplace
Here are ways that your organization can ensure that more workers
benefit from AI gains, based on research and reporting for this
playbook. Read more here.
s Recognize that discourse around AI can be exclusionary, and
set a more inclusive tone.^
s Involve workers as stakeholders in the design, selection, and
implementation of AI technology.^
s Learn how your organization's workers and managers want to
be developed.^
s Frame AI usage in terms of raising the quality of work and
workers' autonomy, instead of efficiency and cost-cuttingd
s Focus on lower-skilled people who could see greater gainsd
s Prioritize inclusive AI engagement by involving people in
groups that are least likely to be using AI todayd
s Communicate to employees how AI could change their rolesJ
s ...without making sweeping decisions and predictions.
How we collected these findings
We're concerned that companies will reflexively adopt AI as a cost-
cutting tool rather than an opportunity to grow their businesses while
improving the quality of jobs, and that AI will undermine diversity,
equity, and inclusion unless there are targeted efforts to counteract
that. This project is meant to shine light on alternative paths that can
produce better societal outcomes.
We believe that understanding workers' and managers' lived
experiences and perspectives is critical for pursuing this goal. They are
the experts in their work-related aspirations and in the contents of
Introduction Charter 09
their jobs. In August 2023, with the research platform Glimpse, we surveyed 1,173 individual contributors and managers across three sectors: manufacturing, service, and knowledge work. Please find additional information about how we collected and synthesized this data in the methodology section.
We also conducted interviews with these experts:

Amanda Ballantyne
Director of the AFL-CIO Technology Institute and director of the AFL-CIO Working for America Institute.

Stephanie Bell
Senior research scientist at The Partnership on AI.
Author of the 2022 report AI and Job Quality: Insights
from Frontline Workers.
Ben Begleiter

Deputy director of research for UNITE HERE, a labor union that represents 300,000 people across Canada and the United States in the hotel, gaming, food service, manufacturing, textile, distribution, laundry,
transportation, and airport industries.

Harry Holzer
Professor of public policy at Georgetown University. Former chief economist for the US Department of Labor.
Alondra Nelson

Professor at the Institute for Advanced Study. Former deputy assistant to president Joe Biden and acting director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.
Olga Russakovsky

Associate professor in the department of computer science at Princeton University and co-founder of AI4ALL, a nonprofit created to foster a diverse future generation of AI leaders.

Aaron Terrazas
Chief economist at Glassdoor.
Disruptions Charter 10
03 Consider who gets to disrupt
and who will be disrupted
Our research and related studies find gaps in early AI
adoption patterns, suggesting that members of several
groups risk not benefiting from gains related to AI. A
significant gap we find between men and women in how they
use (or don't use) generative AI in their personal and
professional lives is especially worth addressing. As Alondra
Nelson, professor at the Institute for Advanced Study and
former acting director of the White House Office of Science
and Technology Policy told Charter, a person's ability to
effectively use technology generally relies on their having

some experience with it.
Disruptions Charter 11
The implication for leaders is that they need to proactively engage with people in historically marginalized groups, including older workers, hourly workers, women, and BIPOC individuals, around the AI support they tell us they're seeking.
Our study finds:
Gender differences in AI adoption are striking.
Women respondents (35%) are less likely than male respondents
(48%) to be using generative AI tools in their jobs currently. People
who have not used generative AI tools to date are much more likely
to be women. (A May FlexJobs report similarly found that women
are adopting AI at a much slower pace both personally and
professionally.Y
In open-ended responses to the prompt "When you think about
how generative AI might impact your work in the future, what first
comes to mind?" women respondents reflected less certainty
regarding how generative AI will impact their work. We saw similar
levels of interest and suspiciousness between genders, though
responses from men showed more optimism and enthusiasm. The
lower levels of optimism among women could, in part, reflect the
fact that they are more likely to work in jobs that have high levels of
exposure to AI and seemingly greater insecurity as a result.R
Men are more likely to express excitement about AI tools and their
work, while their female counterparts expressed less certainty
about how generative AI will impact their work. We also find fewer
instances of positive sentiment from women about what's ahead in
their work related to AI. When responding to the statement "I am
excited about the prospect of using generative AI as part of my
day-to day-work," 66% of men agreed compared to 46% of women
respondents.
The lower levels of Black workers share more fears about intermediate optimism among women job precarity.
could, in part, reflect the Over half of Black respondents express concern about AI replacing
fact that they are more them in their jobs in the next five years (53%), 14 percentage points
likely to work in jobs that higher than for white respondents (39%). At the same time:
have high levels of
exposure to AI and In this data we find the most notable differences by race and ethnicity when seemingly greater comparing Black and white respondents' answers. Respondents who chose to self-identify selected Black, white, Hispanic, Latino, Spanish, Native American, Asian, insecurity as a result." Pacific Islander, and/or additional options to self-describe their origins.
Disruptions Charter 12
> Black workers and managers are already more likely to already be
using generative AI tools in their jobs compared to white colleagues (45% versus 37%).0
> Looking ahead, they are more likely to be enthusiastic about the
prospect of using generative AI as part of their day-to-day work (61% compared to 51%).0
> Black respondents are also more likely than their white counterparts
to value the opportunity to be involved in their employer's AI planning or to help shape their employer's approach to AI adoption (43% versus 32% for white respondents). This simultaneous adoption and excitement coupled with fears about job loss suggests that it is especially important for employers to bring a participatory approach
to AI planning, communication, and learning and development, as
detailed here.
Personal and professional use, as well as enthusiasm about
using AI as part of daily work, drops off starkly with age.
Individuals 18 to 44 are much more likely than their 55+ colleagues to
have used generative AI in their work to date. Personal experimentation
also decreases greatly with age. This suggests a confidence gap that
leaders might address with additional encouragement and support for
older workers as they put these tools into practice in their jobs.

53% The percentage of
Black respondents who
expressed concern
about AI replacing them
in their jobs in the next
five years.
Disruptions Charter 13
Most age groups have similar levels of optimism when it comes to using generative AI in their jobs, with a key exception of older workers (55-64).
While young workers' likelihood to adopt new technologies is unsurprising, how employers respond in this moment will affect generations of older workers, and not necessarily for the better. "I worry that my expertise may be outmoded," one participant in our study wrote.
Charter's study finds that managers are more optimistic, hopeful, and interested in AI than non-managers.
A June 2023 Qualtrics study found a related gap: 64% of surveyed executives characterized AI's potential impact as exciting compared with 39% of individual contributors. We also find these key concerning differences by managerial status
t Some 25% of managers have never used generative AI outside of
work, compared to 41% of non-managers. Some 44% of managers aren't using AI in their work today, compared to 62% of non-managersu
t Managers are notably more likely to trust their organizations to fairly
balance business goals and human interests.

I worry that my expertise
may be outmoded."
- Survey respondent
Disruptions Charter 14
We also find that, compared to individual contributors, managers are
more likely to feel agency around raising their concerns about AI within
their organizations.

Salaried employees feel more secure about a future
that involves using generative AI in their work than
44% hourly workers. 62%
vs. Unsurprisingly, employed respondents are more likely than their
44% of managers aren't counterparts who are paid hourly to trust that the organizations they
using AI in their work, work for will represent their interests with regard to AI. When it comes to
compared to 62% of the prospect of using AI in their work, 60% of salaried employees and
non-managers. 51% of hourly workers express enthusiasm.
Disruptions Charter 15
Knowledge workers use generative AI tools more in their jobs and in their personal lives than people in manufacturing or service roles.
When it comes to organizations' likelihood to embed AI into their processes by the end of this year, knowledge sector respondents are more confident in their employers' implementation (42%) than people working in manufacturing (28%) or service capacities (26%). Experience gaps within organizations with generative AI could lead to increased capability gaps over time, which, concerningly, could result in increased workplace and labor market inequality.
Our findings supplement and support other recent research showing differences in attitudes towards AI by educational attainment and
household income. As Pew Research found in August, "Americans with higher levels of education are more likely than others to say AI is having a positive impact across most uses...A similar pattern exists with household income, where Americans with higher incomes tend to view AI as more helpful for completing certain tasks."
Study snapshot Charter 16
04 Study participant snapshot:
Aspirations and current
personal and professional
generative AI uses
What workers and managers say they are working
towards, and how those aspirations might intersect
with technology use.

Study snapshot Charter 17
We asked study participants about the employment-related aspirations they are actively working toward in the year ahead. The most frequent responses are deepening their expertise in their current roles, growing their networks, and earning a promotion at their organization. How workers' and managers' broader aspirations for their work intersect with technology use and mastery is well worth understanding within your own work context.

How workers' and
managers' broader
aspirations for their Compared to non-managers (17%), managers are slightly more likely to
work intersect with
technology use and want to get a new job with more responsibilities at another organization
mastery is well worth soon (23%). Non-managers are slightly more likely to want to change
understanding within industries (18% compared to managers, 15%). In a tight labor market, it your own work context. behooves employers to consider retention risks in the context of AI
Study snapshot Charter 18
adoption and use. As one respondent wrote about their near-term
goals with their current employer: "Give me more job responsibilities
that AI cannot do."
How participants have used generative AI to date:
Most respondents in our study have experimented with generative AI
personally (67%). Less than half of all respondents (41%) say they had
used generative AI in their work, as of the end of August 2023.
67% Across sectors, here are the most popular generative AI use cases:

The percentage of
respondents in our
study who have
experimented with
generative AI personally.
41% The percentage of
respondents who had
used generative AI in
their work, as of the end
of August 2023.
Disruptions Charter 19
05 Give workers a say in how AI
is developed and deployed
Wharton associate professor Ethan Mollick recently
argued that workers are the best placed people to identify generative AI use cases for their organizations because they're "experts at their own jobs." That's certainly true for generative AI as c-suite executives and board members are themselves trying to understand it.

Disruptions Charter 20
But this is true for workplace technologies more broadly: Companies
will benefit more from the technologies they adopt when they solicit
regular input from the individuals who use it in their day-to-day work.
As Charter reporter Michelle Peng recently wrote, "If allowed to shape
AI adoption as a partner, workers can help organizations use new
technologies to improve jobs and increase productivity, but employers
have to start listening."

The people at the table cannot
just be engineers. The people
at the table really need to be Ben Begleiter, deputy director of research for UNITE HERE, a union
very closely connected to what representing hospitality workers, described "three pieces to this the actual application is going
to be, what the downstream puzzle": developers of AI tools who create them; purchasers, the deployment is going to look employers who procure the tools; and primary users, the hourly like. And we're nowhere near
[them] being anywhere close workers and employees who aren't involved in purchase or design
to first-class citizens in the decisions but who use the tools, willingly or unwillingly, in their daily
discussion, but [they] should
be. I think that's the next battle work.
to fight."
Olga Russakovsky Olga Russakovsky, an associate professor of computer science at
Associate professor of Princeton University researching computer vision, explains how these
computer science at
Princeton University
Disruptions Charter 21
parties might be more connected to create more usable technology:
"The people at the table cannot just be engineers. The people at the
table really need to be very closely connected to what the actual
application is going to be, what the downstream deployment is
going to look like. And we're nowhere near [them] being anywhere
close to first-class citizens in the discussion, but [they] should be. I
think that's the next battle to fight."
There are three primary reasons why organizations see better results when they involve their workers and managers in discussions about technology planning and implementation:
01 Workers can help identify the promising use cases. Educational tech
company Skillsoft, for example, has taken a more bottom-up approach to generative AI adoption, allowing each department to identify use cases, rather than having IT or management tell each department what would be most useful for them. This decentralized approach yielded applications in marketing, engineering, product, legal, and more. Asana
has taken a similar approach and created Slack channels where employees can share new promising uses.
02 Workers can help identify how new technology will impact their workflow. Years ago, Marriott launched an app in five cities to boost productivity by telling housekeepers the order in which to clean hotel rooms. Rather than help housekeepers, however, the new app sent
them on a "wild-goose chase," as one union spokesperson told Fortune. The app directed cleaners from one room to the next, even if it meant switching floors, moving to different wings of the building, and skipping over rooms in need of cleaning on the same floor in the same wing. Workers reported feeling less efficient and were increasingly worried that they wouldn't finish their work on time. Housekeepers concluded that "'engineers designed this thing working with management, but
they didn't talk to us,'" says Amanda Ballantyne, director of the AFL-CIO Technology Institute.
Disruptions Charter 22
03 Workers can help identify how new technology will impact product
and service quality. A Las Vegas casino had plans to upgrade the way
its customers ordered, by allowing them to select drinks directly
through slot-machine interfaces. To management, this seemed like a
good idea. To the casino's cocktail servers, it raised the question: What
happens when a customer switches slot machines or games? "Slot
players are superstitious," says Ben Begleiter. "If you're playing a
particular slot and you don't hit on the first or second spin, you might
get up and move." Cocktail servers know who they're looking for when
delivering a drink because they interacted with the customer while
taking their order and can recognize them. If that first step were to be
replaced by a machine, servers would have a harder time locating
customers-and flagging who should no longer be served alcohol. The
new system also reflected "a fundamental misunderstanding of the
job," says Begleiter. "The server...is the person who makes you feel
comfortable, who makes you feel welcomed. Reducing that to the
person who brings you a drink is dehumanizing."
When companies keep discussions about technology between
executives and engineers, they miss key sets of information: workers'
on-the-ground experiences and ideas for improvement. That
experience can be valuable for identifying high-value applications of
the technology, but also for identifying the downstream problems it will
likely encounter when practically applied. "[Workers are] not just
experts in the content of their work, they actually know what tools work
best for what jobs," says Ballantyne. "They're the troubleshooters.
They're the people who figure out how to adapt technology to a [Workers are] not just specific workplace."
experts in the content
of their work, they Workers, managers, and leaders need to act as partners in determining
actually know what how to best incorporate new technology into their workplaces. "I hate
what jobs. They're the tools work best for the idea of framing [this] as one side or the other, because ultimately,
troubleshooters. productivity and firm success is a cooperative enterprise," says Aaron
They're the people Terrazas, chief economist at Glassdoor. "It's not managers versus
who figure out how to workers. It is everyone working together to make something adapt technology to a meaningful." Ideally, this cooperation starts at the development stage specific workplace." -where AI companies are building the applications-and continues Amanda Ballantyne past implementation. Director of the AFL-CIO Technology Institute
Disruptions Charter 23
An impressive 59% of individual contributors we surveyed indicate that they feel empowered to raise concerns or point out problems related to generative AI at their organization. However, slightly less than half said that they believe that their interests will be well-represented when it comes to generative AI adoption at their company. Some are comfortable speaking up but don't believe that their concerns will be meaningfully acted on. Others say they intend to act, but are waiting to see whether or how their employer will proceed with the technology, such as this participant: "I plan to raise questions or concerns regarding the usage of AI if and when it happens."

Disruptions Charter 24
Managers and individual contributors alike want to help shape their
organizations' approach to AI adoption, according to Charter's survey.
Here are frameworks for ensuring that happens:
For development:
Solicit input from primary users. AI tools should not be designed
without input from their primary users. "It's not that an AI engineer can
come along and solve some problem by themselves," says Princeton's
Russakovsky. "There are so many decisions that go into building an AI
system for something, and the people who are most qualified to make
those decisions are the current domain experts."
Casetext is a promising example of this. The legal AI company employs
attorneys and AI experts to design products tailored to lawyers' needs.
It then beta tests those products with law firms before releasing them
publicly.
Companies designing AI systems for specific industries would do well
to adopt a similar approach. "At a high level, talk to the people," says
Nelson, of the Institute for Advanced Study. "I just would love us to get
to a place where we would take one more step when we're dealing with
things that have implications for people's workplaces. Can we put a
step or two between 'build the product, ship the product, change the
job'?"
For implementation:
At a high level, talk to the Start with workers' friction points. One of the biggest determinants of
people. I just would love us whether or not individuals will want to use AI in their jobs is whether the to get to a place where we technology addresses "something that's known to be an opportunity or would take one more step when we're dealing with a pain point to the workforce," says Stephanie Bell, a senior research things that have scientist at Partnership on AI and author of a 2022 report on AI and job implications for people's workplaces. Can we put a quality. When identifying possible uses for generative AI in your step or two between 'build organization, look for and ask about those points of frustration. the product, ship the product, change the job'?"
Alondra Nelson A May 2023 Microsoft study, for example, found that a significant Professor at the share of office workers said that they would like to use AI to lessen their
Institute for Advanced
Study and former acting workloads by having it, among other things, help with administrative
director of the White
House Office of Science work, make it easier to find the information they need, and quickly and Technology Policy
Disruptions Charter 25
summarize their meeting notes and action items. Companies looking to capitalize on the newest developments in AI should ask employees for their ideas on where to start. "Ask them where they see opportunities, ask them where they see challenges-and figure out whether anything on the market actually solves for those," says Bell. "If the answer to that is no, chances are that these technologies are going to be met with some resistance." There are many ways to source that input, including through worker councils, employee surveys, and focus groups.
Opt for a greater level of worker control over the technology. Another factor in whether or not employees welcome AI in their jobs is their "ability to have some level of control over it," explains Bell. In the
Partnership on AI's AI and job quality report, her team writes about customer service agents in India who use an AI software program that offers real-time coaching, assesses their performance, and assists them with certain tasks. At some companies, agents are told to treat the AI alerts as suggestions, rather than requirements. Agents at other companies, however, were told to closely follow the AI's recommendations. "Both groups recounted instances where they judged the AI to be incorrect in its recommendations," according to the report, "but the group empowered to deploy their judgment on calls or in chats felt more autonomy and control over the quality of the service they provided."
Give plenty of notice before implementing important new technologies. A 2018 strike of Marriott workers ended with several important results, chief among them: Management had to tell hotel
staff about new technologies 165 days in advance, giving them time to voice any concerns. Even without 165 days as a standard, other employers can adopt a practice of communicating technological change far in advance. "Gradual change that is broadcasted is often more palatable and less painful for workers," says Glassdoor's Terrazas.
If they are to implement
AI in our organization, A large share of Charter's survey respondents said they wanted to
clearly detail how our jobs hear from their employer about how AI is going to impact their jobs. will change and exist
alongside AI, instead of One respondent wrote: "If they are to implement AI in our organization,
simply replacing us." clearly detail how our jobs will change and exist alongside AI, instead of
- Survey respondent simply replacing us."
Criteria for workers Charter 26
06 Criteria for workers
embracing AI
As Google research scientist Rida Qadri wrote for
WIRED in 2022:
"Technology that responds to people's needs is
technology that sees users as more than just passive
recipients of a tool. It realizes the inherent ingenuity of
users, respecting their ability to creatively navigate
their constraints and dream up uses of technologies
never envisioned by the designers themselves."

Criteria for workers Charter 27
The workers and managers we studied and the experts we interviewed for this project identified these related factors:
WHEN NEW TECHNOLOGY HAS A GREATER LIKELIHOOD
OF BEING EMBRACED:
f Workers have been involved in design and implementation of
the technologyU
f The problems it improves are workflow issues they've
experienced and helped identifyU
f They have the ability to control the technology, and to use their
discretion in overruling it as neededU
f It augments their creative knowledge and expertise about how
to do their workU
f It is injury-preventing, not pain- or stress-inducingU
f Employers have made ample training and advance notice of
changes available.
WHEN TECHNOLOGY IS MORE LIKELY TO BE REJECTED:
f The technology is forced upon workers without their
consultationU
f The rollout and use of the technology is extractive, racist, or
otherwise dehumanizingU
f It is used primarily for the purposes of surveilling themU
f The targeted problems are planned for productivity purposes
or don't address problems that impact routine work positivelyU
f Workers' bodies or mental wellbeing are further stressed or
put at riskU
f AI is managing or assessing individuals' performance, rather
than coaching them.
Past technology Charter 28
07 Past technological
transformations offer
cautions about
shared prosperity
These three historical cautionary tales demonstrate
the uneven benefits of technology.

Past technology Charter 29
In the early 1900s, telephone operator was one of the most
common jobs for young American women. But mechanical
switching rendered that role obsolete. Patented in 1891, the
automatic telephone exchange was gradually adopted across the
country over the following decades, replacing human operators in
the process. The job prospects for future generations of young
American women weren't worse off, according to a 2020 National
Bureau of Economic Research working paper. Instead of working
as telephone operators, those women worked in other
occupations, including secretarial work and waitressing. "You see
new parts of the economy finding uses for these young women,"
Daniel Gross, one of the study's authors, recently said. But that
overall picture disguises the pain that incumbent telephone
operators experienced. A decade after being impacted, those
workers were more likely to work lower-paying jobs or to leave the
labor force entirely.
The rise of computer technology in the workplace had a
dramatic impact on the labor market starting around 1980. With
its ability to perform routine manual and cognitive work,
computers over time primarily displaced middle-skill jobs, like
clerical and production work. At the same time, computers
complemented the work performed by high-skilled workers, who
spend more of their time on nonroutine tasks that draw on
creativity and problem-solving skills. Because computers
expanded opportunities for high-skilled workers while replacing
many middle-skill jobs, they increased inequality in the United
States.
Past technology Charter 30
London taxi drivers have had to pass a test demonstrating their
knowledge of the city's thousands of streets and landmarks since the 19th century. The ability to memorize that amount of information is a skill-one that has been devalued over the past decade by the rise of digital maps. Digital maps enabled far more people to become drivers by automating the task of navigation. And "by combining navigation tools with digital taxi dispatch, Uber and Lyft have enabled almost anyone with a car to provide the
same services as taxi drivers," write economists Ajay Agrawal, Joshua S. Gans, and Avi Goldfarb. That's a good thing for consumers and the drivers whom it has enabled, but much more complicated for incumbent taxi drivers, who have seen their
wages decline across cities from the increase in competition.
For more historical examples, read Power and Progress: Our Thousand-Year
Struggle Over Technology and Prosperity by Daron Acemoglu and Simon Johnson.
Frameworks Charter 31
08 Frameworks for ensuring
that more workers see
benefits from AI
Benefits of AI are real, workers say-though those benefits may not be evenly distributed without intervention.

Frameworks Charter 32
Among those who have used generative AI in their work, the main
benefits that individual contributors report experiencing include, in
order: time savings, higher-quality work, generating new ideas, and
lower stress. Respondents wrote:
"AI can help take over some of the more common and repetitive
administrative tasks I do on a daily basis. There is worry about AI taking over jobs, but with me, AI should be very helpful in streamlining my processes, making them more accurate, and giving me time to work on other tasks."
"I'm confident that AI will not replace my job, as a computer will
never make the creative leaps humans can, and I like that it saves me time so I can do more things."
Managers' experiences are similar, though they are more likely to
report AI being useful in their development of new ideas (55%
compared to 38% for non-managers, who may have less
encouragement to be creative).

AI can help take over some
of the more common and
repetitive administrative
tasks I do on a daily basis.
There is worry about AI
taking over jobs, but with me,
AI should be very helpful in
streamlining my processes,
making them more accurate,
and giving me time to work
on other tasks."
- Survey respondent
Frameworks Charter 33
Looking toward future uses
According to an August survey of 29,000 global professionals by
LinkedIn, "AI is seen as a way to unlock fresh opportunities for work-life balance and skill enhancement." Workers surveyed expect AI to open up free time for them that they plan to use to improve work-life balance (45%), focus on tasks they enjoy more (44%), learn new skills (39%), and strengthen their professional networks (30%).
More than half of all respondents in Charter's study agree or strongly agree (54%) that "I am excited about the prospect of using generative AI as part of my day-to day-work." We saw widespread interest in the supplementary benefits that AI can provide to augment human labor. In the words of survey respondents:
"It may be able to help make jobs easier, but not necessarily replace
human opinion and judgment."
"My organization could limit the use of AI, and only have employees
use it as a tool and not a replacement. The employees should still
review everything in case there is something that the AI did that
was incorrect."
"AI cannot do what I do!"
Causes for concern:
This enthusiasm isn't evenly distributed, however (see "Consider who gets to disrupt and who will be disrupted"). And enthusiasm also doesn't negate significant concerns we find across respondent groups that increased AI usage in their industries will have the following effects.
Frameworks Charter 34

In response to the question "What are you concerned about in your industry
from increased AI usage?" one respondent had this to say about how their
employer could help address their data privacy questions: "Implementing
proper accountability measures and monitoring the machines' behavior can
help to alleviate concerns."
Bias considerations:
We also find substantive concerns that generative AI can "create
biased opinions," in the words of one survey participant, based on the
flawed existing material that AI tools are trained on. Some 17% of
surveyed workers and managers indicated that they're concerned
about bias and discrimination in their industry from increased AI
usage.
Thoughtful humans One of the more concerning areas for this is hiring, where algorithms
have to be mindful of could discriminate against certain candidates based on trends they've
ensuring that the tech been trained on. This is a risk area where augmentation becomes
serves their hiring important. "Thoughtful humans have to be mindful of ensuring that the values and criteria." tech serves their hiring values and criteria," says Charter's head of
Massella Dukuly workplace strategy and innovation Massella Dukuly. She suggests
Charter's head of
workplace strategy and having diverse panels regularly review AI outputs and override innovation
Frameworks Charter 35
inappropriate recommendations, which also helps inform future suggestions.
AI can also be used to mitigate biases. Consider linguistics software company Textio, which uses natural language processing and machine learning to detect non-inclusive language in job postings, performance feedback, and more. Moonhub, an AI startup, has an AI agent that recruiters can work with to find promising candidates. The tool flags potentially biased searches and helps identify ways to find more
diverse candidates, according to TIME.
Displacement fears:
Our research finds that individual contributors (58%) are more likely to be concerned about job loss or replacement from increased AI usage in their industry compared to managers (46%). This difference could reflect less lucrative employment alternatives for non-managerial workers. (Though, as Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, and Simon
Johnson write in the Can we Have Pro-Worker AI? policy memo: "Simply displacing workers is never good for the labor market, even when the displaced are highly paid. Displaced formerly high-paid workers are forced to compete for jobs with lower-wage workers, leading to a downward cascade in wage levels.")
A sizable number of both non-managers and managers we surveyed- upwards of 40%-voice concerns that generative AI will replace them in their job in the next five years. Similarly, 46% of employees in the
most recent Edelman Trust Barometer report, Trust at Work, said they were worried about losing their jobs ​​to automation.
When we asked, "When you think about how generative AI might impact your work in the future, what first comes to mind?" we heard job security considerations including these:
It may replace me/my
position because my
employer may think that "It may replace me/my position because my employer may think
it's cheaper and as that it's cheaper and as effective compared to a human." effective compared to a
human." "It's a little scary, as an administrative professional, AI is something
- Survey respondent that could definitely replace me."
Frameworks Charter 36
"I need to update myself and have to learn some technology so that I
don't become jobless."
"I think it has the ability to make my job obsolete, along with many
others. I think a lot of people will be jobless thanks to AI in the near future if regulations are not made."
"Generative AI will be able to run and process payroll, as well as
invoice customers and pay outstanding bills, which would result in my not having a job."
It's critical that executives seek details from their workers about these
and related fears and communicate about them openly. As Julia Dhar,
a managing director and partner at Boston Consulting Group, told
Charter, "Don't ignore people's concerns. The fact that you are not as
concerned as they are doesn't mitigate their concern at all. Not one bit.
Talk about safety, equity, dignity at work. Participate in that
conversation."
And as one survey respondent wrote, "Be open and [as] up front about
it as possible." Another wrote that is happening in their workplace
already:
"We have already had discussion around this. My employer is
committed to making our jobs easier, and not to getting rid of or replacing us with AI. My org can help ensure that with discussions, training, reassignments, and understanding the value of human input. I think training is a huge pro in alleviating concerns."
We have already had
discussion around this. My
employer is committed to How they're preparing making our jobs easier, and
replacing us with AI. My org Employers and managers are among the main sources can help ensure that with not to getting rid of or discussions, training, employees are turning to for guidance around AI:
reassignments, and When we asked who they trust most to provide them with AI tools, understanding the value of training, and related career guidance, managers and non-managers human input. I think training is a huge pro in alleviating indicated self-reliance (44%) and employers (43%) first, followed by
concerns." managers and tech companies (both 31%). It's notable that both - Survey respondent employees and hourly workers trust these sources over educational
Frameworks Charter 37
institutions, colleagues, friends and family members, and their labor unions.
Relatedly, Edelman found in its latest Trust Barometer report that employees trust employer-provided media more than any other type, including information from other corporations or their social media feeds. This offers a unique opportunity to employers.

When asked what they have done or plan to do to alleviate their concerns about generative AI and the future of their jobs or careers, we heard about workers' and managers' personal experimentation. We also found repeat hopes for open communication with employers:
"I've been watching and testing it out. Using AI to answer questions,
Our company could and then trying to independently verify the answers by doing the clearly state how AI will research myself." be used and for what
purposes. They can also
indicate how our team "The thing that helps most to alleviate concerns is to research...
can utilize AI to make After researching and testing, I've found AI to be a helpful tool in their roles more copywriting, but it is NOT perfect and never will be. Even after copy productive for the generation it requires a human to review and tweak to make future."
- Survey respondent perfect-and always will."
Frameworks Charter 38
"Our company could clearly state how AI will be used and for what
purposes. They can also indicate how our team can utilize AI to make their roles more productive for the future."
"Be open and honest about job retention for employees."
"Clearly communicate plans for both software development as well
as human workers."
Fostering AI adoption Charter 39
09 How to foster human-
centered AI adoption
in your workplace
It's not enough to rely on tech companies or government intervention to realize more inclusive usage of AI tools. Here are ways that your organization can ensure that more workers benefit from AI gains.

Fostering AI adoption Charter 40
Recognize that discourse around AI can be exclusionary,
and set a more inclusive tone.
"There's a fear and mystique around it that's being maintained, whether
that's deliberate or not," says Princeton's Russakovsky. "There's
definitely a sense of an inner circle versus others." If left unchecked,
technological gatekeeping will prevail, with effects that can be
detrimental to worker self-determination and financial wellbeing.
When communicating about AI, use approachable, inclusive language`
Y Avoid using AI/machine-learning jargon and explain concepts
simply instead to prevent exclusion. Instead of saying: "Our new NLP classifier model utilizes a convolutional neural network architecture to analyze text data," try:
"Our new system uses artificial intelligence to categorize text.
The AI looks for patterns in the text to learn which language is associated with different categories. This can help us tag customer feedback by topic more efficiently."
Y Here's a podcast episode to share with your colleagues who want
to learn more about how generative AI works in simple terms:
Explained: The conspiracy to make AI seem harder than it is!
Involve workers in the design, selection, and
implementation of AI technology.
Y Solicit ideas from employees on how to implement the technology
and involve them in planning, including for internal trainingÖ
Y Ask employees about friction points in their workflows that might
be prioritized and solved by using existing AI toolsÖ
Y Select vendors that prioritize human-centered design. Ask how
they include primary users-not only purchasers-in identifying
Ask for input and addressable needs, input, and expectations of their software. confirm exactly how
affect our positions says, "The most important thing at this moment as business leaders and departments." the process will This collaboration begins with regular dialogue. Glassdoor's Terrazas
- Survey respondent begin to implement and experiment with generative AI and the
Fostering AI adoption Charter 41
workforces, there needs to be a really good-faith effort to learn...and have a conversation about what it is doing to to our workforces and to our lives and to our well-being."
Clear communication tops what workers and managers say they're seeking from their employers. They encourage the following:)
"Ask for input and confirm exactly how the process will affect our
positions and departments.
"Provide more education to all employees.
"Have an open discussion about goals" for the technology-
"Publish goals for AI use."
Frame AI usage in terms of raising the quality of work and workers' autonomy, instead of efficiency and cost-cutting.
There is benefit in talking about AI in terms of its contributions to work quality, not just higher productivity. People who are using AI in their work already see such enhancements to their work product, with 46% of relevant respondents to our survey noting "higher-quality work" as one outcome they've experienced.
AI can also allow employees to complete tasks more independently, giving them access to information and strengthening their sense of autonomy and purpose. In contrast, when the benefit of AI tools is described as increased productivity, it reinforces the commoditization of labor and short-term financial logic that fewer workers could be necessary.
46% Learn how your organization's workers and managers want
to be developed.
Workers and managers shared these frequent aspirations in our study:
Many survey deepening their expertise in their current roles, growing their networks,
respondents who are and earning a promotion at their organization. Many of them already using AI in their demonstrate a growth mindset, in the words of Jared Spataro, work say they see Microsoft's corporate vice president for Modern Work & Business enhancements to their work product. Some 46% Applications. As he told Charter, "It's an embrace-and-extend mindset. note "higher-quality If you see an opportunity in a technology shift, you'll be able to take work" as one outcome advantage of that opportunity." they've experienced.
Fostering AI adoption Charter 42
In your organization's template for career and performance
conversations for managers with their reports, include prompts to
learn and assess their growth goals. Ensure they are consulted
regularly about,
What might be keeping them from realizing the benefits they hope
to see from using AI in their roles1
The AI educational material that might be best personalized to
their needs and functional uses. Ensure that training is equally
flexible for workers, managers, and executives to decide how and
when they want to undertake it.>
The types of support that match the technical skills they want and
need. This could include providing stipends for them to find and pursue relevant training on their own.
For more discussion prompts, find our questions for survey
respondents in the methodology section. You can repurpose these for
1x1 discussion purposes or use them in wider employee engagement
surveys.
Focus on lower-skilled people who could see greater gains.
As Anton Korinek, a professor in economics and business at the
University of Virginia, told us: "One potential upside of generative AI is
that it seems to help lesser-skilled workers more than higher-skilled
workers, thereby reducing inequality among workers." Several studies
have highlighted this effect. One involving the use of a generative AI
tool in a customer-service center, for example, found that lower-skilled
workers saw a 35% gain in performance, while the most experienced
workers didn't see any.
One potential downside to this is that generative AI could devalue the
expertise of many workers. MIT economist David Autor recently gave
the example of London cab drivers (mentioned earlier) to illustrate this
point: "You might say, 'Oh, Waze makes everyone an expert driver,
right?' But, no, actually, it doesn't. It doesn't make anyone an expert
driver. [Waze] has the expertise." By devaluing expertise, generative AI
could lead to a decline in wages for many workers.
Fostering AI adoption Charter 43
Employers should pursue an alternate path, one that helps drive
equitable pay and work conditions. This could involve leveraging AI tools to make more employees high performers while emphasizing their unique capabilities, such as engaging with clients and customers and their ability to add the context that AI lacks.
As one survey respondent wrote: "It's scary, yet promising. I'm confident it can be utilized without jeopardizing human job positions." Another told us: "I don't think we really have to worry about Al replacing what is needed in my work, which is true human connection."
Prioritize inclusive AI engagement by involving people in groups that are least likely to be using AI today.
p Audit your hiring practices. Who is being screened out because of
their existing skills whom your organization might better bring
along and train to use AI tools?c
p Recent precedent suggests innovative companies prefer hiring
young workers. When managing through technological change,
consider that experienced workers bring important "returns"
beyond and in addition to their technical skills, according to
research by Bruce A. Weinberg of Ohio State Universitya
p Highlight AI benefits that are specific to diverse users. Explain how,
with human oversight, AI can make jobs easier, faster, and safer.
Tailor messaging to resonate with relevant audiences based on
their needs and concernsa
p Don't assume intuition with these technologies. Provide extensive
AI training and support, including clearing time in staff schedules
for participation. Offer training at multiple levels, from AI basics to
hands-on workshops, and make it available for synchronous and
asynchronous participationa
p Discuss the possibility of incentivizing or recognizing early
adopters from a range of backgrounds to show widespread
primary users and use cases. Per the World Economic Forum's
It's scary, yet promising. good work framework, foster employability and a learning culture I'm confident it can be by ensuring your "talent processes recognize and reward skilling utilized without achievements." jeopardizing human job
positions."
- Survey respondent
Fostering AI adoption Charter 44
Communicate to employees how AI could
change their roles...
Emphasize how your organization's AI experimentation and usage
furthers its values, as well as ways it could help your workforce operate
with more autonomy. BCG's Dhar similarly recommends
communicating with intent, advance notice, and clarity:
"Here are the tasks that we think are most likely to be quickly
transformed by generative AI. We bet that you have additional ideas and places where we might also trigger that transformation, and we welcome you to bring those forward as well.
The first thing we are going to do is train you for that very specific transformation, those tasks that are going to change.
And then the next thing we are going to do is open up this broader conversation inside our company about the larger shifts that are likely to happen. We're going to welcome that discussion. We're not going to avoid people's concern."
...without making sweeping decisions and predictions.
Some companies have made bold statements around AI and hiring
freezes, but it's still early to make major staffing decisions based on the
technology. Similarly, technologists have made drastic predictions that
only serve to scare people. Nelson gives the example of AI pioneer
Geoffrey Hinton saying in 2016 that we should stop training radiologists
because deep learning would be able to do a better job in five years.
"Hinton says that, and people go with that. Nobody tested this
empirically. As a consequence, you freak out a bunch of workers."
Instead of replacing radiologists, those tools have augmented their
skills. "If we had asked radiologists...we might have been able to make
the augmenting process smoother, do it sooner, maybe save lives,
maybe have better care."
Methodology Charter 45
10 Methodology
This is an original research and reporting project to better understand the attitudes, concerns, and desires of workers around the adoption of AI tools in their workplaces. Charter's research and editorial teams gathered three key information sources for this playbook:
1. Literature review:
Our exploration of relevant articles and studies can be found in the reading list in the appendix.
2. Expert interviews:
We conducted in-depth interviews with a range of practitioners, labor economists, research scientists, organizers, and others to help contextualize what's known and unknown about AI in modern workplaces, including lessons from past technological transformations. Our conversations with many such experts during the
course of our work at Charter deeply inform this research project, as do the expert interviewees listed earlier.
Methodology Charter 46
3. Survey research:
Charter, with a grant from Innovation Resource Center for Human
Resources, used the Glimpse human response platform to conduct an
online survey of 1,173 individuals between August 6 and August 26,
2023.
The survey was administered using a non-probability-based sample,
and quotas were used to ensure that non-managers represent
approximately 50% of respondents. Participants included individuals
who are paid hourly as well as salaried workers. Individuals opted in to
participate and were compensated at an industry standard rate.
The overall sample features representative geographic, ethnic, and
age diversity. We did not rebalance the respondent sample to be
reflective of the US population in regards to gender3. As the workplace
DEI analytics firm Dandi has written, women face high risks from AI:
"Clerical positions, for which women are overrepresented, are
considered one of the roles most susceptible to automation by
generative AI, according to a recent report from the International
Labour Organization."
Respondents were evenly distributed across the knowledge,
manufacturing, and service sectors of the US economy. Researchers
reviewed all responses for quality control. We also used generative AI
through Glimpse and ChatGPT Plus Advanced Data Analysis to
confirm themes we identified from aggregate data and open-ended
responses.
Below please find survey questions and answers options. We
encourage you to repurpose these with your teams and in your own
employee survey data gathering.
3 According to Pew Research, "Studies that compared weighted and
unweighted estimates from online opt-in samples found that in many
instances, demographic weighting only minimally reduced bias, and in some
cases actually made bias worse."
Methodology Charter 47
Professional ambitions
n7 What employment aspirations are you actively working towards
for the year ahead? Please choose all of the aspirations that apply to you7
E` To earn a promotion at my organizatio9
M` To get a new job with more responsibilities at another
organizatio9
/` To get a new job with similar responsibilities at another
organizatio9
-` To grow my networ+
?` To deepen my expertise in my current rol?
V` To change industriek
6` To start to manage otherk
1` To manage more associatek
;` Other [please specify$
P` None of the abov?
T7 How are you currently compensated by your employerH
E` I'm paid on an hourly basik
M` I receive a salar3
/` A combination of hourly and salary-based compensatio9-` Other [specify]
Methodology Charter 48
AI considerations
The following questions will ask your thoughts about generative
artificial intelligence (AI). These techniques are used to generate new
content, such as text, images, and audio. Commonly used examples of
generative AI include ChatGPT, Bard, and Photoshop Generative Fill.J
? When you think about how generative AI might impact your
work in the future, what first comes to mind?J
? Do you currently use generative artificial intelligence (AI) in your
jobY
oH Yes, as dictated by my organizatioA
iH Yes, for my individual use but not as dictated by my
organizatioA
eH Yes, some in alignment with organizational policies and some
for my individual us
gH Other (specifyX
H I'm not sur
H NE
*? Which of these uses of generative AI do you currently use for
work, whether your employer is aware or not? Please choose all of the uses that apply.J
oH Image generatioA
iH Code generatioA
eH Text generatioA
gH Text summarizatioA
H Social media optimizatioA
H Marketing optimizatioA
>H Meeting transcriptioA
H Idea generatioA
qH Legal contract revie
nH Hiring assistanc
bH Performance management assistance (e.g., staff reviewsX
xH Video generatioA
[H Audio generatioA
AH Researc
EH Customer servic
{H Customer segmentatioA
OH Data analysiv
kH Other [please specifyz
vH None
Methodology Charter 49
V What are the main benefits at work you have experienced from
using generative AI? Please select all that apply.g
lh Time savings
@h Generating new ideas
=h Cost savings
^h Lower stressg
Lh Increased employee engagemenp
Uh Being seen as innovative to othersg
Qh More time o8
oh Other [please specify4
jh Non^
.h How much do you agree with this statement? I am excited about
the prospect of using generative AI as part of my day-to day-work.g
lh Strongly agre^
@h Neither agree nor disagre^
=h Disagre^
^h Strongly disagreeg
zV What are you concerned about in your industry from increased
AI usage? Please select all that apply.g
lh Job loss/job replacemenp
@h Bias and discriminatioX
=h Data privacE
^h Errors and lower quality quality worB
Lh Increased stress and/or faster pace expected for human
workers
Uh Other [please specify4
Qh Non^
h How much do you agree with this statement? I am confident that
my organization will fairly balance business goals and human interests in using generative AI.g
lh Strongly agre^
@h Neither agree nor disagre^
=h Disagre^
^h Strongly disagree
Methodology Charter 50
G3U How much do you agree with this statement? I believe that my
interests will be well-represented, by myself or a larger collective, around generative AI at my organization.T
%U Strongly agre1
^U Agre1
U Neither agree nor disagre1
U Disagre1
1U Strongly disagreeT
GGU How much do you agree with this statement? I feel empowered
to raise concerns or point out problems related to generative AI at my organization.T
%U Strongly agre1
^U Agre1
U Neither agree nor disagre1
U Disagre1
1U Strongly disagreeT
G.U How much do you agree with this statement? I'm confident that
my organization values its workers' input around the use of new technologies, and will equitably distribute opportunities that come with increased usage of generative AI.T
%U Strongly agre1
^U Agre1
U Neither agree nor disagre1
U Disagre1
1U Strongly disagreeT
G:U How much do you agree with this statement? If my employer
adopts generative AI tools AND achieves real benefits (like time or money savings, or a decrease in the need for repetitive tasks), I trust that my employer will pass those benefits along to me
%U Strongly agre1
^U Agre1
U Neither agree nor disagre1
U Disagre1
1U Strongly disagree
Methodology Charter 51
mU How much do you agree with this statement? I am concerned
that generative AI will replace me in my job in the next 5 years.w
Jv Strongly agre[
3v Agre[
5v Neither agree nor disagre[
7v Disagre[
[v Strongly disagreew
m1 What could your organization do to help alleviate your concerns
about generative AI and your role{
m% When it comes to AI, which form of support from your employer
would you most value{
Jv Employer-provided learning experiencek
3v Budget for independent learnin
5v Clear communication about AI plans relative to my rol[ 7v The ability to help shape my organization's approach to AI
adoptionw
[v Other [please specify
m+ What have you done or plan to do to alleviate your concerns
about generative AI and the future of your job or career{
m^ Who do you trust to provide you with AI tools, training, and
related career guidance? Please select all that apply.w
Jv Yoursel
3v Your organizatio
5v Your manageA
7v Colleaguek
[v Your labor unio
v Tech companiek
v MediJ
9v Friends and family memberk
Dv Educational institutionk
Hv Other [please specify]
Methodology Charter 52
X/D Looking forward to the end of this year, what do you anticipate
changing in your organization's use of AI? Please select all that apply.H
+G Increased adoptioC
;G New workplace usage polic!
NG Change in usage polic!
LG New tools used by sta
%G Clear guidance for which tools staff should us%
bG Embedding of AI tools into more processeU
AG Other (specify\
G Nothing will chang%
aD How often do you currently use generative AI personally, outside
of work[
+G Dail!
;G At least once weekl!
NG At least once monthlyH
LG I've used it a few timeU
%G I've never used it
Acknowledgements Charter 53
11 Acknowledgements
Thanks to all survey respondents and expert interviewees for sharing their time and experiences with us.
Thanks to Charter's Sarah Janowsky, Massella Dukuly, and Melissa Zwolinski for their collaboration on this playbook.
We are grateful to Jodi Starkman of IRC4HR for her support in championing this work.
Adam Bai and Neil Dixit of Glimpse provided valuable project partnership.
Two important resources helped inform our approach to this projectY
T We're appreciative of the World Economic Forum's good work
framework, which establishes five useful objectives for people policies and workforce strategies:-
T Promote fair pay and social justice-
T Provide flexibility and protection-
T Deliver on health and well-being-
T Drive diversity, equity and inclusion-
T Foster employability and learning culture-
T We drew inspiration from Future Forum's research highlighting
important intersectional differences in workers' sense of belonging during the pandemic, and the importance of flexible work in furthering inclusion.
Funder & partner info Charter 54
12 Funder and partner information
We gratefully acknowledge project support and
funding from Innovation Resource Center for Human
Resources (IRC4HR(r)).
About Innovation Resource Center for Human
Resources (IRC4HR)
Established as Industrial Relations Counselors (IRC) in 1926 with a
mission to "advance the knowledge and practice of human relations in
the workplace," IRC4HR remains dedicated to the creation and
ongoing enhancement of work-and work environments-in which the
goals and objectives of organizations, the aspirations of individuals,
and the interests of society are served.
We accomplish this by funding research and multi-stakeholder
dialogues that produce practical and actionable insights and tools to
help organizations, leaders, and workers succeed together through the
profound business and social challenges of the 21st-century
workplace. https://irc4hr.org
Funder & partner info Charter 55
Research partner
About Glimpse
Glimpse is a global, self-service, generative AI-powered research platform that focuses on language, emotion, and sentiment, sorted and analyzed in real-time and over time, providing actionable insights and content for marketers, communicators, researchers, and creatives.
Users can easily gather and understand responses to up to 15 open or closed-ended questions, with thousands of responses in hours. They can use industry-leading generative AI to create topics and summaries, craft key messaging, and generate personas. Users can rapidly uncover emotions, sentiments, and awareness underlying decisions-right at the intersection of quantitative and qualitative research. Glimpse has extensive experience applying generative AI to client challenges at world-class organizations, from HubSpot to Honda,
Ogilvy to Diageo. https://www.glimpsehere.com/
About Charter Charter 56
13 About Charter
Charter is a future-of-work media and research
company. We're designing new frameworks for work so
that people and organizations thrive. Charter's
sophisticated journalism, actionable research, and
advisory services empower leaders to transform their

workplaces.
About Charter Charter 57
Sign up for our free newsletter about the future of work and our Work
Tech newsletter with independent reviews of the technology powering your work, including new generative AI tools.
You can read our further coverage and research on AI and work. And
sign up for a Charter Pro membership to have full access to our reporting, research, events, and advisory support. Contact us at
hi@charterworks.com.
About the authors
Emily Goligoski

Emily is the head of research and SVP at Charter. She previously led audience research at The
Atlantic, the Membership Puzzle Project at New
York University, and The New York Times. She
teaches about the business of media at the
Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.
Jacob Clemente

Jacob is a reporter at Charter Pro, primarily
covering AI in the workplace. Prior to Charter, Jacob was a researcher at the Freakonomics Radio Network, and a research assistant for historian Chris Miller, author of Chip War, and business
school professor Michael Porter.
Kevin Delaney

Kevin J. Delaney is CEO and editor-in-chief of
Charter. He was previously a senior editor for The New York Times and managing editor at The Wall
Street Journal. Kevin co-founded Quartz and served as co-CEO and editor-in-chief from 2012 to 2019.

Daniel Lee
Daniel is the director of design at Charter.
Prior to Charter, he was the vice president of
design at Quartz and lead product designer at
The Huffington Post.
Copyright 2023, Charter Works Inc.
Reading list Charter 58
14 Reading list
Please find relevant articles and research to learn
more about these topics: https://chtr.cc/48OOFug

